FOR THE NEXT GENERATION
FY22
NIKE, Inc.
Impact Report
FOR THE NEXT GENERATION
A LETTER FROM
OUR ATHLETES
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
2 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Looking back, it all started with love. 
Love for smashing aces on the court, drilling crosses on the pitch, parrying 
strikes on the piste, running circles around the boys. Love for the two-adays, three-a-days. Love for the big moments and bright lights, but also 
the solo sessions, the hard days, the grind. 
That passion is what drives you to break records and win championships. 
It’s also what leads you to realize: this journey is bigger than you. 
Because let’s be real – as women and as athletes, so much of this wasn’t 
built for us. Not the institution of sport, and not the system and structure 
of society. As athletes and as women, our only playbook has been to be the 
change we want to see. 
A Black girl from Compton who doesn’t fit the sport? Don’t just break the 
mold. Change the sport – on your way to changing everything. 
A champion becoming the world’s fastest mother? Nurture what’s next – 
and redefine the meaning of legacy.
A soccer player claiming her space with every play? Build a platform to 
fight for everyone to win. 
A trailblazer on the court who inspires a nation? Show every girl 
watching: no dream is out of reach. 
A fencer facing odds others call impossible? Prove what’s possible 
when you begin with belief.
A footballer writing history on the world stage? Shine a light for the 
next generation. 
In our whole careers, in our whole lives, we haven’t waited on change. 
We set out to create it. And when it comes to the biggest challenges of 
our time, that is the spirit we want to bring. 
Whether it’s advancing equity for women and girls, fighting climate 
change or uplifting our communities, we can’t just wait. We can’t just 
hope. We all have a part to play in creating a better world, and that’s 
why it means so much to share this journey with NIKE, and with all 
of you. 
The truth is, it hasn’t been easy. Moving the world forward doesn’t 
happen overnight. As women and as athletes, we’ve pushed to be seen 
and heard. We’ve raised our voices to help drive that change, and NIKE, 
you’ve been there to listen and evolve with us.
More than anything, what our journey has shown is that real innovation 
and lasting impact happens when we create a new playbook together 
– one built on engaging more deeply, championing women more 
meaningfully and expanding opportunity for generations to come. 
So, to the changemakers out there: No matter where your journey takes 
you, our wish for you is to hold on to why you started. We see you, we 
hear you, we believe in the fire you have inside you. 
We can’t wait to see the future you will create.
Love,
Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce Ada Hegerberg Li Na Megan Rapinoe Bebe Vio Serena Williams
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
3 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
The way we see it, sport has always been 
one of society’s most powerful catalysts 
for change. And over the years, what we’ve 
learned has moved NIKE forward, too. 
Our inspiration comes in many forms, and 
from many voices. The teammates who help 
shape a more equal and inclusive culture. 
The coaches and community leaders who 
step up to expand access to youth sport. 
The innovators who help protect our planet, 
and the future of sport. The athletes who 
stand up, speak out, and push us to grow. 
Above all, NIKE’s journey is a work in 
progress. We continue to listen, learn, 
and evolve. We grow not just to serve 
today’s athletes, but also for the next 
generation – the next Shelly-Ann, Ada, 
Li Na, Megan, Bebe, and Serena. The future 
changemakers. And just like the athletes 
we serve, we’ll keep pushing to realize 
our full potential. 
Sport moves us forward. It always has, 
and it always will. 
John Donahoe
President and CEO 
NIKE, Inc.
If you’re reading this letter, it’s because you 
understand the power of sport.
You know that sport changes the way we 
see ourselves, and the way we see the world. 
Sport connects us with a shared language 
– the joy of a run, the thrill of a game, the 
power of movement, the calm of a deep 
breath. Sport builds community, opens 
minds, and changes hearts. 
To me, that’s what NIKE’s potential for 
impact is all about. NIKE’s mission is to 
bring inspiration and innovation to every 
athlete in the world. Our purpose is to 
move the world forward through the power 
of sport. And in the face of society’s most 
pressing challenges, our belief is that sport 
can bring us together to change the world 
for the better.
More than 50 years ago, the passage 
of Title IX in the United States opened 
doors of opportunity for women and girls 
through sport. Within the same week, a 
small startup in Oregon would introduce 
its running shoes at the U.S. Olympic Track 
and Field Trials. And from the beginning, 
NIKE would define the word “athlete” 
through the lens of equality: “If you have 
a body, you are an athlete.” 
Introduction Letter from John
John Donahoe 
President and CEO, NIKE, Inc.
Our purpose is to 
move the world 
forward through 
the power of sport.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
4 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Introduction Letter from Michelle
NIKE has long challenged 
itself to share its journey 
with humility and 
transparency.
When I think about how NIKE leads with 
purpose, two words that come to mind are 
boldness and humility. NIKE has never been 
shy about setting bold, ambitious goals to 
create a better world through sport. Equally, 
NIKE has long challenged itself to share its 
journey with humility and transparency.
More than twenty years ago, the NIKE, 
Inc. Board of Directors first established a 
committee tasked with overseeing matters 
related to environmental and sustainability 
initiatives, labor practices, diversity and 
equal opportunity, and other issues related 
to corporate responsibility. Since then, 
NIKE’s commitment to corporate purpose 
has only deepened and grown – building 
on the continuing commitment to strong 
governance, sustainable growth and 
responsible leadership. 
Today, the Board’s Corporate Responsibility, 
Sustainability & Governance Committee 
oversees NIKE’s corporate governance, 
as well as the risks and opportunities 
associated with NIKE’s three Purpose 
pillars – People, Planet, and Play. As a 
committee, our responsibilities include 
monitoring NIKE’s progress against its 
five-year Purpose targets and long-term 
sustainability goals; providing oversight 
of significant Purpose-related strategies, 
activities, policies, investments and 
programs; and reviewing and providing 
guidance to management regarding the 
development of this annual Impact Report. 
Purpose is embedded in NIKE’s DNA, and 
continues to guide NIKE’s growth. On behalf 
of the NIKE, Inc. Board, we are pleased to 
share this FY22 NIKE Impact Report.
Michelle Peluso
Chair, Corporate Responsibility, 
Sustainability & Governance Committee
NIKE, Inc. Board of Directors
Michelle Peluso, 
Chair, Corporate Responsibility, 
Sustainability & Governance Committee
NIKE, Inc. Board of Directors
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
5 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Introduction About this Report
Our Targets
In 2005, NIKE published its first set of 
five-year Purpose targets, and we have 
stayed committed to this practice ever since. 
Today, we have a set of 29 ambitious 
corporate targets for the period from FY20 
to FY25, focused on our Purpose across 
People, Planet and Play. These targets 
represent our multi-year commitment to 
drive impact, meet stakeholder expectations 
and align with NIKE’s business priorities.
When we set our 2025 targets, we did so 
with the ambition that they be bold but 
attainable and measurable. Approaching the 
work with an athlete’s mindset, our targets 
are meant to push us to the edges of what 
we can achieve – and in doing so, progress 
our enterprise meaningfully. Simply put, if 
we are easily crossing every finish line, then 
we need a race that is more challenging.
We work toward progress through strategic 
planning, piloting innovations, implementing 
solutions at scale and sharing best 
practices with our partners. Our approach 
distinguishes us because we:
− Connect executive compensation 
to progress toward our 2025 targets 
− Leverage annual milestones and 
rigorous tracking to improve 
performance management 
− Extend accountability of targets deeper 
into our value chain than ever before, 
specifically in the areas of carbon, 
waste, labor and supplier diversity 
− Align with the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals and other frameworks
About This Report
This year’s report represents the second 
year of performance toward our 2025 
targets. For each target, our report provides 
context on our goal and approach, details 
the initiatives underway to reach the target 
and updates on the results of our efforts. 
This includes reflecting on what areas of 
work have proven challenging, and sharing 
what plans we intend to pursue to address 
those areas in the future.
Throughout the report, we have included 
spotlights on the employees and athletes 
helping drive this work around the world, 
recognizing the people and stories behind 
our progress.
The final two sections of the report provide 
details on reporting methodology, Purpose 
governance, report assurance and data 
tables to provide additional transparency.
We know that success will not be linear, 
but accountability in this space means 
sharing our achievements and learning 
from our challenges openly – we are proud 
to do so in our FY22 Impact Report.
This yearʼs report 
represents the 
second year of 
performance 
toward our 
2025 targets.
97%
17K
375K
97% of our waste is diverted 
from landfill, with 72% of our 
waste recycled.
51% of our global corporate workforce 
are women.
We have engaged 375k+ girls in local 
play and sport programs this year.
In FY22, we supported 17k 
coaches with our training tools. 
Since 2020, we’ve reduced Scope 1 
and 2 emissions by 64% through 
multiple avenues including 93% 
renewable electricity.
Planet
Play
Play
64%
51%
Planet
People
An inspiring female coach 
encourages a young trans 
athlete to join the team. They 
feel supported and included.
Your favorite college track star shares 
that she can train at any time of day 
without worries of excessive heat.
A world where waste is transformed 
into something new. A colleague’s promotion confirms 
your own path is just as possible as 
hers. Her mentorship and support 
of you has made all the difference.
There’s an inclusive, welcoming 
place to play just around the corner.
MOVING THE 
WORLD FORWARD
We’re well on our way to the world we want to see. 
It’s a place where women and girls have a voice, 
inspire as athletes and serve as proud protectors of 
their planet. It’s a world where everyone in our next 
generation sees a brighter future.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
6 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Introduction Impact Summary
7 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
Introduction
Target Progression
Introduction Table of Contents
 PEOPLE CORPORATE
21 Representation & Hiring
41 Pay & Benefits
51 Inclusive Culture & Engagement
60 Education & Professional Development
63 Business Diversity & Inclusion
 SUPPLIERS
65 Health & Safety
70 Gender Equity
74 Worker Engagement
 FOUNDATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
80 Code of Conduct
 PLANET
90 Carbon
111 Waste
123 Water
127 Chemistry
 PLAY 
136 Active Kids
143 Inclusive Community
147 Employee Engagement
153 Community Investment
 OUR REPORTING APPROACH
156 Reporting Methodology
157 Issue Prioritization
161 Governance
162 Risk Management
 APPENDIX
164 Data Tables
195 Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Index
215 Assurance Report
216 NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
 INTRODUCTION
2 A Letter From Our Athletes 
3 Letter From Our CEO
4 Letter From Our Board Committee
5 About This Report
6 Impact Summary
 2025 TARGETS
10 FY22 Performance Summary
8 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
Introduction
Target Progression
Introduction Safe Harbor Statement
Note
The information in this report and NIKE, 
Inc.’s corporate responsibility/sustainability 
reporting and website, inclusive of charts, 
graphs and discussion, and all other 
information presented, may contain 
forward-looking statements, estimates, 
or projections based on expectations as 
of the original date of those materials. 
Those statements, estimates and 
projections are not guarantees of future 
results or performance and are subject 
to certain known and unknown risks and 
uncertainties that are difficult to predict, 
are often beyond our control and could 
cause actual results to differ materially. 
These risks and uncertainties are detailed 
in our reports filed with the U.S. Securities 
and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), 
including our Annual Report on Form 
10-K. Presented information may also 
discuss previously non-public financial 
and statistical information. Our approach 
to the disclosures included in this report 
and NIKE, Inc.’s corporate responsibility/
sustainability reporting and website differs 
from our approach to the disclosures we 
include in our mandatory regulatory reports, 
including our filings with the SEC. This 
report and our corporate responsibility/
sustainability reporting and website are 
intended to provide information from a 
different perspective and, in certain cases, 
in more detail than that required to be 
included in our filings with the SEC. Climaterelated science, data and methodologies 
are rapidly evolving; those underlying our 
climate-related analysis and strategy remain 
subject to evolution over time. For example, 
we believe the methodology of carbon 
accounting will continue to improve over 
time, especially as it relates to Scope 3 GHG 
emissions. As a result of improvements to 
the quality and completeness of our data 
and updates to our methodology over 
time, we may include information in future 
disclosures that differ from those contained 
in this report. Unless otherwise specified, 
all information (including forward-looking 
information) speaks only as of the date 
on which it is made, and we disclaim any 
obligation to update or delete any outdated 
information contained in this report or in our 
website materials. All content is the property 
of NIKE, Inc. This report contains third-party 
data. We have not, and do not intend to, 
independently verify third-party data. Actual 
results and outcomes may differ from those 
expressed in or implied in this report due to, 
among other factors, any applicable legal 
requirements and/or industry standards, 
in providing such data.
Sebastian 
Coe Building 
NIKE World 
Headquarters, 
Beaverton, OR.
9 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
Introduction
Target Progression
01 2025
TARGETS
10
 FY22 Performance
Summary
PEOPLE
Introduction
Target Progression
REPRESENTATION & HIRING Metric FY201 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 change 
vs Baseline FY25 target
50% representation of women in global corporate workforce 
and 45% in leadership positions
% women in global workforce 50.2% 50.4% 51.1% +0.6 p.p.2 +0.9 p.p.2
50%
% women in leadership positions 39.3% 43.0% 44.1% +1.1 p.p. +4.8 p.p. 45%
30% representation of U.S. racial and ethnic minorities3
at Director level and above
% U.S. racial and ethnic minorities 
at Director level and above
26.2% 30.5%4
34.5% +4.0 p.p. +8.3 p.p. 30%
35% representation of U.S. racial and ethnic minorities3 in our 
U.S. corporate workforce5
% U.S. racial and ethnic minorities 
in U.S. corporate workforce 31.5% 34.5%4
38.8% +4.3 p.p. +7.3 p.p. 35%
$10 million investment in Historically Black Colleges and 
Universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs)
$ invested (cumulative) — $0.45M $1.75M $1.3M $1.75M $10M
Enhance opportunities and marketing of open roles 
for Firstline athletes6 to compete for corporate roles
Qualitative — — — — — —
Corporate
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
10 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Target Progression People Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
PAY & BENEFITS Metric FY20 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 change 
vs Baseline FY25 target
100% pay equity across all employee levels on an annual basis $ earned by men/women; $ earned 
by white/U.S. racial and ethnic minorities 100% 100% 100% — — 100%
Provide competitive and equitable benefits for 
all employees
Qualitative — — — — — —
INCLUSIVE CULTURE & ENGAGEMENT
Top quartile of benchmarked companies for both 
engagement7 and inclusion8
Average percent favorability engagement9 — 80% 79% -1.0 p.p. — Top Quartile 
FY22: 83%
Average percent favorability inclusion9
— 75% 77% +2.0 p.p. — Top Quartile 
FY22: 82%
Continue to focus on improving access to athletes* of 
all abilities for our brand, our experiences, our product, 
our facilities and our company
Qualitative — — — — — —
EDUCATION & PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
100% of Vice Presidents complete and be credentialed 
on Inclusive Leadership education
% VPs completing training — 0% 45%10 +45 p.p. — 100%
2x investments focused on professional development for 
racial and ethnic minorities in the U.S. and women globally
$ invested in professional development $76K $85K 
1.1x
$685K 
9.0x
$600K $609K 2x
BUSINESS DIVERSITY & INCLUSION
$1 billion cumulative spend on diverse suppliers11 $ spent on diverse suppliers (cumulative) — $282M12
$777M +$495M $777M $1B
Corporate
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
11 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Target Progression People Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
Introduction
Target Progression
HEALTH & SAFETY Metric FY20 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 change 
vs Baseline FY25 target
100% of strategic suppliers14 are building healthy 
and safe workplaces15
% suppliers with Level 3 health 
and safety maturity
22% 27% 46% +19 p.p. +24 p.p. 100%
GENDER EQUITY Metric
100% of strategic suppliers14 have gender 
equitable workplaces16
% suppliers achieving mature 
gender-equitable capability
— 0% 2% +2 p.p. +2 p.p. 100%
CODE OF CONDUCT19
Metric
100% of facilities in our extended supply chain 
meet NIKE’s foundational labor, health, safety 
and environmental standards
% compliance with 
Foundational Expectations
94% 85% 60% -25 p.p. -34 p.p. 100%
% of facilities measured for compliance 
of anticipated total scope
66% 79% 97% +18 p.p. +31 p.p. 100%
WORKER ENGAGEMENT Metric
100% of strategic suppliers14 are measuring 
and improving worker engagement17
Strategic suppliers measuring 
and improving engagement
— 0% 21% +21 p.p. +21 p.p. 100%
Supplier13
Foundational Expectations18
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
12 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Target Progression People Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
PLANET
Introduction
Target Progression
CARBON Metric FY20 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 
change 
vs Baseline FY25 target
70% absolute reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
in owned or operated facilities through 100% renewable 
electricity and fleet electrification20, 21
Owned or operated facility GHG 
emissions (metric tons CO2e) 
213,152 122,882 75,76822 –38% –64% -70%
% renewable electricity 48% 78% 93%22 +15 p.p. +45 p.p.23 100%
0% emissions change in manufacturing and transportation24 Manufacturing and transportation 
GHG emissions (metric tons CO2e)
3,650,162 2,864,812 3,086,965 +8% -15% 0% 
change
0.5M metric tons emissions reduction through 50% 
environmentally preferred materials (EPM)25
Materials GHG emissions reduced 
(metric tons CO2e)
96,020 123,367 182,611 48% 90% 500,000
% EPM 31% 32% 39% +7 p.p. +8 p.p. 50%
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
13 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Target Progression Planet Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
Introduction
Target Progression
WASTE Metric FY20 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 change 
vs Baseline FY25 target
10% waste reduction per unit in manufacturing, 
distribution centers (DCs) and headquarters (HQs)26
Waste/unit (g/unit) 292.38 274.58 269.40 -2% -8% -10%
100% waste diverted; 80% recycled in manufacturing, 
packaging, DCs and HQs27
% waste diverted from landfill 
and incineration
96% 97% 97% 0% +1% 100%
% waste recycled 68% 70% 72% +2 p.p. +4 p.p. 80%
10x finished product waste (FPW) refurbished, recycled 
or donated28
FPW collected and recycled 
or donated (units)
1.28M 2.44M
1.9x
3.11M
2.4x
+0.66M +1.83M 10x
WATER
25% reduction in freshwater usage per kg textile dyeing 
and finishing29
Freshwater use/kg textile dyeing 
and finishing (L/kg) 84.36 78.68 76.91 -2% -9% -25%
13B liters water restored in our extended cotton 
supply chain30
Water restored (L) 0.65B 2.06B 3.72B +1.66B +3.07B 13B
CHEMISTRY
Adopt clean chemistry alternatives for our 10 priority 
chemistries across our supply chain
# priority chemistries with clean 
chemistry alternative
0 0 0 — — 10
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
14 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Target Progression Planet Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
PLAY
Introduction
Target Progression
ACTIVE KIDS Metric FY20 FY21 FY22
FY22 change 
vs FY21
FY22 change 
vs baseline FY25 target
Drive sustained community impact by getting kids moving
in our key cities and sourcing backyards with 
50% girl participation
% girl participation — 52%31
50% -2 p.p. — 50%
INCLUSIVE COMMUNITY
Invest $125 million to support organizations working to level
the playing field and addressing racial inequality
$ invested (cumulative) — $36.6M $69.6M $33M $69.6M $125M
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
Increase the number of employees engaged in their 
communities to a minimum of 35%
% of employees engaged 
in their communities
37% 35% 35% — — 35%
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT
Invest 2% of prior-year, pre-tax income to drive positive
impact in communities 
% of prior-year, pre-tax 
income invested
1.9% 3.4% 2.2% -1.2 p.p. +0.3 p.p. 2%
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
15 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Target Progression Play Favorable Target met
Increase/Decrease
Unfavorable 
Increase/Decrease
Play
Our Reporting Approach
People Appendix
Planet
16 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction
Target Progression
Target Progression Footnotes
1 FY20 was the target year for our FY20 targets (FY15–
20) and is the baseline year for the majority of our 
2025 targets. The continual expansion of our Purpose 
targets’ depth and breadth is a key element of our 
strategy. As such, we introduced new areas included 
in target scope with the 2025 targets. As a result, 
in many cases, FY20 values disclosed in the FY20 
NIKE Impact Report differ from those provided in this 
report, reflecting the more inclusive measurement 
scope in our most current targets. For the nine Planet 
targets and the three Supply Chain targets, the target 
year (when target value achievement is measured) 
is considered the full FY25. For the Foundational 
Expectations target and the People targets, FY25 Q4 
constitutes the final measurement period.
2 p.p. = percentage points.
3 U.S. racial and ethnic minorities as defined by EEO1 
categories including American Indian or Alaskan Native, 
Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic/Latino, 
Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander.
4 Updated from FY21 Report based on changes in how 
employees self identify.
5 U.S. corporate workforce includes all U.S.-based 
full-time employees who do not work in our retail 
stores, distribution centers (DCs) or Air Manufacturing 
Innovation (Air MI).
6 Firstline athletes include full-time employees who 
work in our retail stores, DCs or Air MI.
7 This index measures the emotional commitment our 
teammates have for NIKE, influenced by their day-today experiences. 
8 This index measures the extent that our teammates 
feel that NIKE supports a culture of diversity and 
inclusion, as well as their personal perceptions around 
feeling valued and included.
9 Due to change in vendor, we are no longer able 
to measure our percentile metric. We are able to 
measure our percent favorability, and assess whether 
we score within the top quartile. See target narrative 
for further detail.
10 Due to terminating our relationship with our 
credentialing vendor, we would like to note that 
moving forward we will be using an internal 
credentialing program and that our target progression 
in FY22 should be viewed as a standalone year.
11 A diverse supplier is one that must be majority (at 
least 51%) owned, operated, managed and controlled 
by a diverse* person or persons who are either U.S. 
citizens or lawful permanent residents. *A “diverse 
person” may be defined as a minority**, woman, 
disabled, LGBTQ and/or veteran. **Minority is defined 
as African American, Hispanic, Asian American, 
Native American, Pacific Islander or other types of 
ethnic minorities here in the United States. 
12 The basis for the revised spend data is based on 
three driving factors: We validated existing suppliers 
that qualified as diverse, but were not previously 
designated. This included researching the suppliers’ 
certification, that the certification had been accurately 
recorded in our systems, and that the resulting spend 
data was reflected correctly. We have increased 
our outreach to Tier 1 suppliers (prime contractors) 
to report their Tier 2 (subcontractor) spend. We 
increased our survey scope from 16 to 200 suppliers 
(representing the majority of total indirect spend). 
This resulted in suppliers retroactively reporting 
their historic Tier 2 spend, which was not previously 
asked for by NIKE. We have been able to significantly 
improve the frequency and maturity of our data quality 
(validation) reviews.
13 Targets focused on Tier 1 finished goods and Tier 2 
materials suppliers within our extended supply chain 
and their workers.
14 Strategic suppliers: strategic finished goods suppliers; 
suppliers representing approximately 80% of total 
footwear and apparel production.
15 Healthy and safe workplaces: Supplier must reach 
Level 3 safety and health maturity on Culture of Safety 
Maturity Assessment.
16 In order to reach mature gender equity, suppliers must 
achieve an overall Gender Equity Self-Diagnostic Tool 
(SDT) score of 71% and perform at a certain threshold 
in each of the SDT’s 10 domains. The baseline for this 
target was created in FY21 as the tools to measure 
didn’t exist when the target period started. While none 
of the strategic suppliers reached a mature level of 
gender equity in FY21, more than 95% of suppliers 
met our FY21 milestone to deploy and validate the 
SDT, develop an action plan and implement actions.
17 Criteria for measuring and improving engagement 
must be met for the factory to count toward the 
target key performance indicator of measuring 
and improving. While most suppliers have started 
to measure worker voice in their facilities, none 
have advanced to the next phase, which involves 
responding to and improving worker experience. 
We will begin reporting on progress next year as 
suppliers begin to enter this next phase. The baseline 
for this target was created in FY21 and this information 
wasn’t measured in FY20.
18 Targets focused across the NIKE supply chain – 
including Tier 1 finished goods and Tier 2 materials 
suppliers, their workers and facilities, as well as NIKE 
employees at owned-and-operated facilities (Air MI 
and DCs). 
19 The Nike Code of Conduct and Code Leadership 
Standards lay out the minimum standards we expect 
each supplier facility to meet. Our scope for this target 
includes Tier 1 finished good suppliers, Tier 2 material 
suppliers representing approximately 90% of our 
footwear uppers and apparel materials, focus DCs 
representing at least 80% of volume, and our NIKE 
owned or operated manufacturing facilities (Air MI).
20 Target represents NIKE’s Scope 1 and 2 emissions 
footprint, including facilities and HQ fleet vehicles, 
and corporate jets.
21 FY15 is the baseline for NIKE’s RE100 target, which 
was 14% renewable energy.
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion 
on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has 
performed limited assurance over for the period from 
June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the 
Assurance Report.
23 Renewable electricity use was 14% when the baseline 
for this target was created.
24 Scope includes suppliers representing approximately 
80% of total footwear and apparel production; 
suppliers representing approximately 80% of total 
footwear upper materials and apparel textiles 
production; and about 95% of both inbound 
and outbound transportation.
25 Footwear EPMs: recycled polyester, recycled rubber, 
leather that reduces NIKE’s enterprise carbon impact; 
currently includes synthetic leather and NIKE’s nonleather substitute for leather, Flyleather. Apparel EPMs: 
recycled polyester, organic cotton, recycled cotton, 
third-party certified cotton.
26 Scope includes packaging applied in finished goods 
manufacturing; suppliers representing approximately 
95% of total footwear production; Air MI; DCs; and 
HQ locations. Apparel manufacturing waste not 
yet included in reporting scope as data sources for 
target tracking are under establishment.
27 Scope includes suppliers representing approximately 
95% of total footwear production and about 60% 
of apparel; Air MI; DCs; and HQ locations. Diverted: 
Includes waste to energy incineration, recycled waste 
and composted waste. Recycled: Includes recycled 
and composted waste.
28 FPW consists of unsellable inventory in NIKE’s 
marketplace (product deemed as unsellable through 
normal sales channels including aged inventory, 
samples, defectives, consumer returns) and endof-life product owned by the consumer. We use 
an apportioned methodology when accounting 
for units recycled, to address the constraint that 
a full unit cannot always be recycled. To avoid 
overclaiming benefits from recycling, we only count 
the portion of the unit that is recycled in our target 
performance numbers.
29 Scope includes suppliers representing approximately 
80% of total footwear upper materials and apparel 
textiles production.
30 Restored through a portfolio of projects that support 
long-term resilience for water-stressed ecosystems 
and communities within our extended cotton 
supply chain.
31 FY21 percentage has been updated for consistency 
with FY22 data which is inclusive of girls ages 0 
through 17.
02 PEOPLE
17 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
CORPORATE
21 Representation & Hiring
41 Pay & Benefits
51 Inclusive Culture & Engagement
60 Education & Professional Development
63 Business Diversity & Inclusion
SUPPLIERS
65 Health & Safety
70 Gender Equity
74 Worker Engagement
FOUNDATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
80 Code of Conduct
People Introduction
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
18 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Being seen, heard and included is much more 
than a numbers game. But by measuring our 
progress and charting representation across 
gender, race, ethnicity and identity, we keep 
ourselves accountable. 
In doing so, we’re moving closer to achieving 
the equity that every team, supplier, partner 
and organization we work with deserves.
I picked up my first racquet at the age of five. I was a kid in Compton, 
a place that was most definitely not known for churning out worldclass tennis athletes. My sister, Venus, and I knew that the courts we 
practiced on weren’t opened with us in mind. But we made them 
our own. As my game grew and my career advanced, I understood 
that so many elements of the game — from the rules to the gear — 
weren’t designed for players like me. Whether it was the fit, the form, 
the function or the style, I was not represented and I had to make it 
my own. Today my voice reaches far beyond sport. So I’d be remiss if 
I didn’t fiercely advocate for the next generation of female players and 
young Black and Brown creators. Often overlooked in design fields, the 
creative contributions we have yet to make are what’s needed to make 
our world brighter, bolder and better. Whether on the court or in the 
studio, seeing more players and designers like me and like you, who 
are not afraid to bring our best game will make all the difference. It is 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Serena Williams
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
19 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
I picked up my first racquet at the age of five. 
I was a kid in Compton, a place that was most 
definitely not known for churning out world-class 
tennis athletes. 
My sister, Venus, and I knew that the courts we 
practiced on weren’t opened with us in mind. But 
we made them our own. As my game grew and 
my career advanced, I understood that so many 
elements of the game – from the rules to the gear 
– weren’t designed for players like me. Whether it 
was the fit, the form, the function or the style, I was 
not represented and I had to make it my own. 
Today my voice reaches far beyond sport. So I’d 
be remiss if I didn’t fiercely advocate for the next 
generation of female players and young Black and 
Brown creators. Often overlooked in design fields, 
the creative contributions we have yet to make are 
what’s needed to make our world brighter, bolder 
and better. Whether on the court or in the studio, 
seeing more players and designers like me and like 
you, who are not afraid to bring our best game will 
make all the difference. It is what will dare people, 
like you and my young daughter, to dream even 
bigger, and maybe even achieve a major award 
– or a grand slam – or two. 
To create such a future, I partnered with NIKE in 
2019 to build the Serena Williams Design Crew 
(SWDC). Each year we choose 10 up-andcoming designers of diverse backgrounds and 
perspectives, with the mission of seeding a new 
era in design and expanding sport for a new 
generation. Much like me, the SWDC apprentices 
have a bold and progressive vision. I want to 
empower them to not follow trends, but instead 
create them.
I’ve always believed the world isn’t one color. 
What some say does not match, ends up coming 
together beautifully. At SWDC, we represent 
different backgrounds and think differently. 
When we bring all that diversity together, just 
imagine the amazing things that we’ll create…
I can see it and I hope you can see it, too. 
“I’ve always believed the world isn’t one 
color. At Serena Williams Design Crew, 
we come from different backgrounds and 
think differently.”
With gratitude, 
Serena
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
20 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
21 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Our mission hasn’t changed. NIKE wants 
to be a leader in building a diverse, inclusive 
team and culture, and this target is important 
in our work to create the equitable playing 
field of the future. 
Gender equity in the workplace is part of 
our goal of creating an environment that 
enables self-identified women to reach their 
full potential and reflect the female athletes 
and the communities where we live, work 
and play. 
Our FY21 representation of women in 
our global corporate workforce (50.4%) 
increased by 0.7 percentage points to 
51.1% in FY22, allowing us to surpass our 
target. And, we went from 43% of women in 
leadership positions to 44.1% in FY22, 
0.9 percentage points shy of our 45% 
2025 target. 
We continued to expand our diversity 
recruitment, talent development and 
retention practices, adopting a datadriven approach to guide our actions 
and decisions. 
50% representation of women 
in global corporate workforce 
and 45% in leadership positions
Quantitative Target
People: Corporate Representation & Hiring
% of women in the global workforce
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
% of women in leadership positions
2025 Target
50%
2025 Target
45%
50.4% 51.1% 43.0% 44.1%
 “When we set out to build the largest 
WNBA roster in Jordan Brand history 
– it wasn’t about setting records, it was 
about setting the standard. We wanted 
to show off the depth and diversity of 
play across the women’s game, and to 
create a legacy that invites in a new 
generation onto the court with us.”
Jasmine Jordan 
Basketball Field Rep, 
Women’s Sports 
Marketing
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
22 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
We also continued to build deeper and 
stronger relationships with 10 strategic 
women-only external partners, including 
Girls in Tech, Grace Hopper Celebration, 
Latinas in Tech, Lesbians Who Tech, Women 
Back to Work and the Society of Women 
Engineers, to help drive representation, 
retention and development opportunities. 
In addition to helping NIKE source 
candidates from a variety of backgrounds, 
these partnerships offer unique benefits, 
supporting career development through 
professional memberships, leadership and 
technical trainings, networking and team 
building. NIKE’s diverse group of employees 
participated in 50 Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion (DEI) conferences in FY22, of which 
12 focused on professional women and their 
needs. For example: 
FOCUSED LEADERSHIP 
DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM (FLDP) 
An opt-in program in partnership with 
world-class, expert leadership development 
firms, the purpose of the FLDP is to help 
accelerate the movement, representation 
and retention of talent. Many of the offerings 
include leadership development programs 
focused on workplace and leadership 
experiences specific to gender identity, 
race and/or ethnicity, and sexual orientation. 
The purpose of the FLDP is to help 
accelerate the movement, representation 
and retention of talent.
ADVANCING 
WOMEN EXECUTIVES 
(AWE) MANAGER 
ACCELERATOR
A cohort-based series of professional 
development courses for Manager to Senior 
Director level women, ADL supports career 
advancement through highly-interactive, 
learning-focused sessions. Participants gain 
access to best practices and new tools that 
help them be more effective as business 
leaders, and a wide network of like-minded 
peers. The courses are facilitator-led and 
include opportunities for networking and 
individualized support.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
23 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
LEADERSHIP 
EDUCATION FOR 
ASIAN PACIFICS 
(LEAP)
A retreat in Hawaii for Asian Americans and 
Pacific Islander (AAPI) women, LEAP is a 
first-of-kind leadership development and 
wellness program for those who identify as 
women in the AAPI community.
Internally, we have continued to work to 
accelerate the career trajectory of women 
in the workplace by investing in signature 
programs to increase a sense of belonging, 
community and professional development. 
For example:
WOMEN IN NIKE 
(WIN)
Building on the success of the previous 
cohorts, in FY22 we expanded this 
24-month program designed for retired 
and retiring Women’s National Basketball 
Association (WNBA) players. The 16 fellows 
in Cohort 3 joined the WIN community and 
received immediate support and mentorship 
from Cohort 1 and 2 alumni, executives, 
their managers, peers and the NikeUNITED 
Networks. In FY22, we added new 
investments in professional development 
opportunities through stronger internal and 
external partnerships. Based on the positive 
response from over 40 WIN participants and 
their managers, we are expanding the WIN 
program in FY23 to also include former U.S. 
track & field athletes. 
VALARI
In FY21, we launched Valari, a nine-month 
fellowship that engaged the talents of former 
caregivers who have already paved a way 
in the technology industry and are eager to 
get back in the game. The program provided 
curated learning experiences for managers 
and fellows to accelerate their leadership 
development, including career coaching, 
executive sponsors and NikeUNITED 
Networks support, as well as mentorship. 
In FY22, all Valari fellows were offered and 
accepted full-time Director-level positions 
in the technology organization, landing 
on teams that are critical to our overall 
Consumer Direct Acceleration offense, 
including Enterprise Data and Analytics, 
and Technical Product Management.
LEAP Women’s 
Retreat
 “I am very proud to inspire personal 
growth and career advancement with 
my women athlete peers by encouraging 
store athletes to participate in 
discussions on women’s topics and share 
their experiences at community events.”
Kelly Zhou
Retail District Director 
of Zhejiang Province; 
Women of Nike & 
Friends Employee 
Resource Group 
Volunteer
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
24 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Our Women of NIKE 
and Friends Network 
has a mission to 
empower, inspire 
and invest in women 
at NIKE.
WOMEN OF NIKE 
AND FRIENDS 
NETWORK (WON)
Since its establishment in 2010, WON 
continues to play a significant role in 
supporting gender equity in the workplace. 
Its mission is to empower, inspire and invest 
in women at NIKE, which it activates through 
three pillars of focus: community, career 
development and connection. In FY22, WON 
expanded its reach from 35 to 48 countries, 
hosting a variety of events and reaching 
more than 10,000 members globally.
In FY23, WON will work to elevate the 
needs of the women of NIKE through 
community building and career development 
opportunities, all while continuing to listen 
and learn, taking a data-driven approach, 
conducting surveys, and sharing insights 
with the business and its members.
LEADERSHIP 
DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMS
We identify and nurture high-potential 
individuals to help develop strong talent for the 
future. In FY22, we revamped the curriculum of 
two signature programs focused on Directors 
and Senior Directors, and we continued to 
offer mentorship and on-the-job training. 
We also provided development opportunities 
with external partners. 
At the executive level, we regularly conduct 
talent assessment evaluations that inform the 
types of training opportunities offered to our 
most senior leaders, including women in senior 
leadership positions. We leverage a variety 
of programs, including executive coaching, 
360-degree reviews that better inform 
individual development plans, and quarterly 
executive development meetings. 
People Representation & Hiring
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
25 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
At NIKE, we are committed to attracting and 
fostering racial and ethnic minority leaders 
as we continue to create an inclusive culture 
and innovative company. We believe that 
a diverse leadership allows us to not only 
serve our consumers and their communities 
better, but also be a better company. 
We have focused our efforts in two different 
areas: hiring new, world-class talent, and 
retaining them, which includes developing 
and promoting internal talent across 
all levels and across all U.S. racial and 
ethnic minorities.
In FY22, we increased the percentage of 
U.S. racial and ethnic minorities at Director 
level and above to 34.5%. This is a four 
percentage point increase, putting us 
above our 2025 target of 30% in FY22. 
30% representation of U.S. racial and ethnic 
minorities at Director level and above
Quantitative Target
People Representation & Hiring
% U.S. racial and ethnic 
minorities at Director level 
and above 
FY21 FY22
2025 Target
30%
30.5% 34.5%
Our DEI strategy has focused on increasing 
representation through key partnerships 
with organizations like The Alumni Society, 
driving awareness of NIKE as a career 
destination for racial and ethnic minorities, 
offering focused development opportunities 
for a diversity of internal talent at the midlevel and above and enhancing the 
day-to-day sense of community for 
a diversity of populations at NIKE. 
For example, in FY22 we continued to 
expand participation in McKinsey & 
Company’s management program for 
mid-level leaders and McKinsey Academy 
for our Senior Directors, Vice Presidents 
and CNEXT platform emerging leaders. 
We continued to invest in NikeUNITED 
Networks and have steadily increased 
participation in NIKE’s DEI mentorship 
program for corporate employees in the 
U.S., which strives to further promote equity, 
opportunity, belonging and inclusivity. 
In FY22, 1,028 employees participated 
in the program across 19 functions, and 
98.5% of participants found the program 
a “valuable experience overall.”
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
26 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
NIKE Black 
Employee Network 
& Friends 
Skate Night
OUR NIKEUNITED 
NETWORKS
The NikeUNITED Employee Networks bring 
together employees and allies who represent 
the unique experiences, perspectives, 
and ideas of our diverse global employee 
team. Networks serve to advance the 
development of their members, promote 
NIKE cultural awareness, and demonstrate 
our commitment to Diversity Equity, & 
Inclusion in the communities where we live 
and work. All the Networks have Executive 
Leadership sponsorship and meet regularly 
with Executive Leadership and our President 
and CEO, John Donahoe.
− Ability* Network
− Ascend Network & Friends
− Black Employee Network & Friends
− Latino & Friends Network
− NIKE Military Veterans & Friends
− Native American Network & Friends
− PRIDE Network
− Women of NIKE & Friends
Converse has also adopted this model 
with five distinct Employee Networks, 
collectively known as ConverseUNITED, 
including Converse Mosaic Network, 
Converse Pride Network, Women of 
Converse, Converse Military Veterans 
and Converse Abilities Network. 
More information can be found at 
NikeUNITED.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
27 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Leadership Positions (Director Level and Above) – Racial Category
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
# % # % # p.p.
American Indian or Alaskan Native 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
9 0.2% 14 0.3% 5 0.1 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 610 13.6% 760 15.5% 150 1.9 p.p.
Black or African American
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
256 5.7% 333 6.8% 77 1.1 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 285 6.4% 340 6.9% 55 0.6 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
9 0.2% 8 0.2% -1 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
196 4.4% 236 4.8% 40 0.4 p.p.
Unknown 35 0.8% 49 1.0% 14 0.2 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 3,073 68.7% 3,164 64.5% 91 -4.2 p.p.
Total 4,473 100% 4,904 100% 431
People Representation & Hiring
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
28 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
In FY22, NIKE increased from 34.5% to 
38.8% representation of U.S. racial and 
ethnic minorities in the U.S. corporate 
workforce, seeing a 4.3 percentage points 
increase, and surpassing the 2025 target 
three years early.
We are continuing our commitment to 
increasing overall representation of racial 
and ethnic minorities in the corporate 
workforce by investing in new hiring and 
retention practices and focusing on targeted 
development offerings for racial and ethnic 
minorities in the U.S. 
From a hiring perspective, we have 
increased our DEI partnerships and financial 
commitments to include 50 organizations as 
part of our efforts to diversify our candidates. 
35% representation of U.S. 
racial and ethnic minorities 
in our U.S. corporate workforce
Quantitative Target
People Representation & Hiring
% U.S. racial and 
ethnic minorities in U.S. 
corporate workforce 
FY21 FY22
2025 Target
35%
34.5% 38.8%
 “I have an overwhelming sense of 
pride as I reflect on the work that 
the Native American Network is 
doing and will do for our community. 
My passion and purpose is to provide 
positive representation and visibility 
for Indigenous peoples, and to amplify 
sustainable change within NIKE 
and beyond.” 
Izzy Yasana Hawley
NA Consumer Direct 
Marketing Unite Manager
Klamath | Modoc | Filipina 
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
29 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
NIKE sponsored L’ATTITUDE, a businessbased national initiative and event bringing 
together over 3,000 leaders focused on the 
New Mainstream Economy and the U.S. 
Latino cohort. NIKE’s engagement included 
a Fireside Chat with our President and CEO, 
John Donahoe and a session on Powering 
Latina Leadership with NIKE board member 
Mónica Gil, and additional sessions featuring 
NIKE executives, athletes and partners, with 
discussions celebrating Latina leaders in 
sport and mental wellness. NIKE’s presence 
at L’ATTITUDE brought together NIKE LatinX 
teammates across all levels and functions, 
including representation from LatinX 
executives, the Latino & Friends Network 
and NIKE retail athletes. 
Working in partnership with Raedio, LLC, 
NIKE sponsored Issa Rae’s HOORAE 
Takeover – a four-day festival celebrating 
Black creatives in art, music, media and 
other fields. NIKE’s participation included 
an innovative community activation 
led by NIKE’s Until We All Win grantee 
and nonprofit partner, Beyond the Ball. 
The event, “NIKE Storytelling by Design,” 
engaged local students from Howard 
University for a sneaker design competition. 
This competition culminated with an 
inspiring storytelling panel featuring NIKE 
designers, followed by a design pitch from 
five student teams, with the winning team 
receiving scholarships. 
NIKE launched a series of career content 
in partnership with Blavity, featuring 
three Black NIKE technologists from 
varying levels within the company. 
The series celebrates our technologists 
and their professional journeys, as well 
as achievements throughout their careers. 
The series received 214,000 impressions, 
reaching a global audience through 
Blavity and NIKE channels. 
NIKE continues to support Harlem’s Fashion 
Row, a key strategic partner whose mission is 
to build community and elevate the voice and 
work of multicultural designers. We hosted the 
third Annual Harlem’s Fashion Row Designer 
Retreat presented by NIKE, bringing together 
designers of color for a multiday summit 
featuring notable designers and brands. 
This event provides resources and creates 
space for designers to learn tools and develop 
relationships that will help this community 
grow their brands and advance their careers.
The Converse All Star Design Team (ASDT) 
apprenticeship program actively allows 
young creatives from diverse cultural and 
educational backgrounds to be part of the 
Converse Design and Innovation team, with 
the two-fold goal of potentially converting 
the apprentices to full-time employees and 
strengthening the design community by 
adding more diverse talent and perspectives. 
We grew our outreach from 210 creatives 
in Year 1 to over 300 in Year 2, specifically 
targeting the Boston, New York City and 
Philadelphia metro areas. For both years, 
creatives were narrowed down to classes 
of 15 design apprentices. Year 1 saw six 
apprentices join the Converse Design and 
Innovation team in roles across the function. 
Of the six, three have been converted to fulltime employees. Year 2 saw four apprentices 
join Converse Design and Innovation team in 
roles across the function.
Additionally, 31 employees received their 
first bachelor’s degrees at the University 
of Memphis with support from Lane Four, 
NIKE’s tuition-paid benefit program in 
partnership with the University of Memphis 
for North America Distribution Center and Air 
Manufacturing Innovation (Air MI) teammates.
Member of the 
Converse All Star 
Design Team
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
30 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
For the Converse intern program, the 
University Relations team has prioritized 
expanding its relationships and consideration 
set for the application pool, in terms of cities 
and schools. The team has several sourcing 
strategies to ensure roles are posted and 
accessible to as many students as possible 
across the U.S. For FY22, Converse had 
a cohort of 20 interns, with 50% female 
participation and 80% from U.S. racial and 
ethnic minorities. This is the most diverse 
intern class to date at Converse. 
We also continued the rollout of the 
mentorship program for managers and 
above, which strives to promote equity, 
opportunity, belonging and an inclusive 
culture. In FY22, we launched the fifth cohort 
of DEI mentorship, with a total of 1,028 
participants across 19 different functions. 
The cohort, which reported a satisfaction 
rate of 98.5%, will be expanded in FY23 with 
pilots in Converse and outside of corporate, 
hopefully leading to a global expansion. 
Participants in 
the Converse 
internship program
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
31 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
NATIVE AMERICAN 
NETWORK (NAN)
NAN’s work throughout FY22 had 
measurable impact in each focus area, with 
highlights including representation, visibility 
and community. 
As it relates to representation, NAN 
featured 32 speakers, seven guests and 
160 Indigenous community members 
and advocates at various internal and 
external events. The third annual NIKE 
Footprint Summit focused on increasing 
representation of Indigenous talent at NIKE 
by identifying tangible solutions that lead 
to real change. 
On the visibility front, hundreds of 
teammates attended Native American 
Heritage Month (NAHM) events, and dozens 
of tribal flags flew at the third annual NAHM 
flag-raising ceremony at NIKE World 
Headquarters.
When it comes to community, NAN 
partnered with the White House and the 
Center for Native American Youth to discuss 
sports and mental health at the White 
House Tribal Youth Forum. In addition, 
NAN elevated Indigenous artists and 
activists through the power of NikeUNITED’s 
larger network.
As part of its ongoing network strategy, 
NAN has five main priorities for FY23: 
− Increasing Indigenous representation 
to 3% by partnering with internal and 
external talent acquisition specialists to 
create the recruitment pathways needed 
to meet the goal 
− Celebrating Indigenous athletes by 
featuring events such as Haudenosaunee 
National Lacrosse Team signing 
− Building and celebrating community by 
hosting events that celebrate, educate 
and empower friends and allies 
− Including all new programing for 
Indigenous Peoples’ Day 
− Promoting awareness through advocacy 
by engaging with N7 athletes and the 
wider NIKE community to bring attention 
to causes such as the Missing and 
Murdered Indigenous Women, Girls 
and Two-Spirit People program 
− Developing Indigenous talent by 
continuing to work with NikeUNITED 
Networks and other allies to 
develop leadership pathways 
for Indigenous employees
People Representation & Hiring
Haudenosaunee 
National Lacrosse 
Team signing event
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
32 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
NIKE, Inc. Totals by Racial Ethnic Minority (REM) Group (Global/Corporate)32
All Employees FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
# % # % # p.p.
Corporate – Racial Category
American Indian or Alaskan Native 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
48 0.4% 50 0.3% 2 0.0 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 2,073 15.1% 2,561 17.0% 488 1.8 p.p.
Black or African American
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
763 5.6% 1,062 7.0% 299 1.5 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 976 7.1% 1,221 8.1% 245 1.0 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
48 0.4% 53 0.4% 5 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
820 6.0% 914 6.1% 94 0.1 p.p.
Unknown 77 0.6% 166 1.1% 89 0.5 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 8,906 65.0% 9,071 60.1% 165 -4.9 p.p.
Total 13,711 100% 15,098 100% 1,387 0.0 p.p.
People Representation & Hiring
32 Corporate is associated with the workforce not directly involved in retail stores, distribution centers or Air Manufacturing Innovation (Air MI). 
Performance Apparel Designer,
Beaverton, Oregon, USA
“Being a BIPOC designer, I know how important 
diversity is. That’s the beauty of the Serena Williams 
Design Crew, it brings that diversity into NIKE, not just 
into design but into so many different departments.” 
SPEND A DAY WITH:
 EMIKO McCOY
People Coaching Diaries
33 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Starting the day right
First thing I do in the morning is find some 
movement. I’m trying to get back into boxing at 
the moment. And then, of course, it comes back 
to Serena. She described to me once how she 
would enter the court, using the walk through the 
tunnel to the court as a place to focus her mind. 
When I arrive at the NIKE campus, that’s my 
tunnel moment. Out of the car, hoodie up, head 
down, earpods in, music blasting. 
I usually have an idea of how I want to start my 
day, but it changes all the time. I work between 
the Serena Williams Building and the LeBron 
James building, where I contribute to the Space 
Hippie line of sustainability-minded footwear, 
so the first thing I need to do is figure out where 
I need to be. 
The five to nine
When I was working in New York, I realized most 
designers don’t have balanced lives. When you’re 
working on a creative project it’s hard to know 
when to stop. But my puppy Cooper helps me 
take care of both of us. He’s a Shih Tzu–Bichon 
mix, a real cutie patootie. I’ll take him out, so we 
can walk and just kind of breathe out the day. 
Design challenges
At NIKE, I’ve learned that you need to take time 
to understand how people use the products we 
design. This was especially true of the maternity 
range, NIKE M. I don’t have kids, so I had to work 
harder to understand that journey. To suddenly 
have this growing belly, what does that feel like? 
I looked at mothers. I noticed how women were 
wearing their partner’s shorts, folding over the 
waistband to make room for their bumps. She 
is literally showing us what she needs, right? So 
that’s a lesson: I’m not in her shoes, but I can let 
her guide me.
Finding space
I love to take walks around the lake at NIKE World 
Headquarters. I’m that person on campus who’s 
always taking pictures of the flowers. I can find 
inspiration that way, for sure, but it’s also just a 
great way to decompress and refresh for the next 
part of the day.
It’s only by looking after yourself that you have 
the energy to give to others. I try to reach out 
to students and young designers when I can. 
Sometimes that’s a cup of coffee with someone 
just starting at NIKE, or giving a talk at a design 
school. We need to listen to the people who are 
coming up after us. They’re the future, right? 
Designing for her
We usually start a new season with a design 
meeting. This is where we get our briefs and 
start to bounce ideas around: What is it we’re 
problem-solving? Whom are we designing for? 
I come out of design sessions full of ideas: the 
history of NIKE as a heritage brand, the lives of 
the women we’re designing for, and the potential 
of the materials we’re working with. So it’s time 
to sketch – I always have a pencil in my hand. 
Drawing lets me work out these ideas in relation to 
the curves of the body: how are the pieces going 
to perform? Where will she need compression 
and where will she need more freedom? 
For Emiko McCoy, design is about empathy.
Emiko knows how it feels to be that 13-yearold girl on the field in the shorts from last year’s 
uniform, still getting comfortable with a changing 
body. She wants to make apparel that brings girls 
back to sport, that gives them the compression 
and the self-expression they need to feel confident 
in any kind of movement. 
After school one afternoon, her mom left an article 
out on the counter about Serena and Venus 
Williams. Emiko was gripped by what she read: 
the sisters had decided to complement their tennis 
careers by studying fashion design. Immediately, 
Emiko saw a path for herself. She found out where 
they went to school in Florida and applied. “To 
see someone that looked like me, designing,” 
Emiko remembers, “that was a defining moment 
in my life.”
In 2020, she joined the first cohort of the Serena 
Williams Design Crew, a diverse collective of 
emerging designers committed to redrawing the 
future of design. She now works at NIKE World 
Headquarters as an apparel designer for NIKE 
Pro, and previously on the maternity line, NIKE (M).
People Coaching Diaries
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
34 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
35 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
NIKE’s commitment to taking action 
to create a better world is reflected in 
its continued support of HBCUs and 
HSIs through Purpose-driven product, 
storytelling, recruitment and investments. 
At NIKE, we’re working to enable 
representation to exist at all levels and that 
starts by cultivating and hiring more students 
from a diverse set of institutions. In FY22, 
we saw positive movement in the diversity 
of our interns and direct hires. 
We continue to build and execute on a 
comprehensive HBCU and HSI strategy 
through year-round engagement. In alignment 
with NIKE’s Black Community Commitment, 
we increased our virtual and on-campus 
engagement with HBCUs. Our Diversity 
Recruitment team hosted resume writing 
workshops, interview preparation sessions 
and informational meetings to help our 
ecosystem of HBCUs to have multiple points 
of contact and access to NIKE opportunities 
throughout the year. 
$10 million investment in Historically Black 
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and 
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs)
Quantitative Target (Corporate)
People Representation & Hiring
For the first time since the pandemic, 
we returned to the NIKE World Headquarters 
(WHQ) campus for an in-person, 
comprehensive summer internship 
experience to help drive recruitment, interest 
and hires. During a nine-week experience, 
our talented group of over 300 interns 
worked on meaningful projects across 
a variety of business areas. Within our 
summer 2022 intern class, 56% identified 
as U.S. racial and ethnic minorities and 58% 
identified as women. The students from 
113 universities around the country included 
representatives from 15 HBCUs and HSIs 
and brought a diverse range of skills and 
backgrounds to help create the future of 
sport. Students from HBCUs and HSIs 
represented 21% of our intern class (HBCUs: 
4%, HSIs: 17%). NIKE’s summer internship 
program aims to convert 50% of interns 
into full-time employees in FY23. 
A $10M investment 
in HBCUs and HSIs
FY21
FY22
Target (Cumulative)
$10M
$.45M
$1.3M $1.75M
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
36 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Representation & Hiring
During FY22, we also laid the foundation and 
recruitment efforts for our global internship 
program. The Global University Relations 
team recruited and hired 88 interns for 
internships in NIKE’s Europe, Middle East 
and Africa (EMEA) offices. 46.5% of this 
intern class identifed as female and 24 
nationalities across EMEA represented. 
We continue making progress toward our 
target of investing $10 million over five years 
in the form of scholarships and academic 
partnerships to increase direct hires and 
interns from HBCUs. In FY22, we delivered 
$100,000 each in academic scholarships 
to seven HBCUs, $500,000 to Morehouse 
College and $100,000 to the United Negro 
College Fund (Atlanta). NIKE donated an 
additional $25,000 in scholarships directly 
to Howard University students through a 
bespoke Storytelling by Design Panel and 
Sneaker Lab Competition. 
In addition to supporting HBCUs and HSIs, 
and to help further increase diversity and 
inclusion within our pool of applicants, 
NIKE’s University Relations and Recruiting 
programs continue to strengthen existing 
relationships and build new partnerships 
with more than 30 Tribal Colleges and 
Universities (TCUs). In FY22, we hosted 
our third annual NIKE Footprint Summit 
focused on creating pathways for Native 
and Indigenous community members with 
were delivered in academic scholarships to eight 
$1.3M
HBCUs and United Negro College Fund 
of interns in our EMEA internship identified as female
46. 5%
an emphasis on university and industry 
candidates. This year, the engagement 
was once again 100% virtual and included 
a mix of internal and external speakers 
including NIKE executives and sponsored 
athletes. NIKE continued our investment 
in the American Indian Science and 
Engineering Society (AISES) and sponsored 
the registration fee for 50 members of the 
University of Oklahoma AISES chapter. 
As a result of our AISES partnership, we 
made valuable connections with students 
pursuing careers in STEM. Additionally, 
NIKE also worked with and invited 
community members from multiple tribes in 
Washington state and Idaho to a customized 
event to learn more about our internship 
and career opportunities. 
Early-in-career and emerging-talentdevelopment programs are critical 
to NIKE’s strategic hiring. We continued 
our investment in the Marketing Vanguard 
Program (MVP), built to accelerate the 
flow of graduate-level talent from diverse 
backgrounds and experiences. We have 
also launched, and recruited students for, 
an HR rotational program modeled after 
MVP. Our inaugural class yielded six interns 
and four full-time employees from diverse 
backgrounds and we will continue to grow 
the program in FY23.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
37 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Additionally, we continue to leverage 
diversity conferences and partnerships 
like Management Leadership for Tomorrow 
and The Consortium to attract talent for 
programs like our summer internship, direct 
hire and graduate-level rotational programs. 
This year, the NIKE Yardrunners program 
founded by NIKE HBCU alumni served as 
an opportunity for teams at NIKE to partner 
with HBCU trailblazers and community 
creatives to create inspirational storytelling 
and philanthropy for the community. 
Through Yardrunners 3.0, NIKE worked 
with the community to tell authentic stories, 
co-create culturally relevant product, 
deliver scholarships, activate on campuses 
throughout homecoming and establish 
networking opportunities through NIKE’s 
University Recruiting team with a sharp 
focus on engaging candidates from a 
diversity of backgrounds. 
In the spirit of co-creation, NIKE worked 
with four Yardrunners alumni who identify 
as Black women on the design of HBCUlicensed footwear, leveraging the iconic 
NIKE Dunk silhouette to highlight four 
institutions: Tennessee State University, 
Clark Atlanta University, Florida A&M 
University and North Carolina Agricultural 
and Technical University. 
We also continue to track our progress in 
representation from universities relative to 
U.S. racial and ethnic minorities and women 
globally – we understand that there is no 
finish line. This allows us to understand how 
our university and early-in-career efforts 
impact and contribute to NIKE’s 2025 Black 
Community Commitments.
People Representation & Hiring
The NIKE 
Yardrunners 
program
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
38 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Our Firstline athletes employees who work 
at NIKE retail stores, distribution centers and 
Air MI, are talented individuals from different 
cultures and backgrounds across the globe. 
They reflect the communities where we live, 
work and serve, and possess a wealth of 
product knowledge and consumer insights.
For that reason, the NIKE Athlete Experience 
(NAX) function exists to obsess the endto-end experience for our retail Firstline 
teammates. One pillar of NAX, Firstline 
Programs, equips our retail Firstline 
teammates with accessible pathways to 
broaden their skills and competencies 
through corporate and retail work 
opportunities. The suite of NAX programs 
provide curated and intentional experiences 
at WHQ and in the field to 
elevate talent within the NIKE ecosystem, 
and develop the future leaders of NIKE.
In FY22, we were able to tap into and elevate 
the largest and most diverse talent pool yet 
at NIKE. We currently have five programs 
that sit within our suite of career experiences 
in the NAX program for Firstline retail 
athletes, and hope to expand into Converse, 
distribution centers and Air MI in FY23. 
Enhance opportunities and marketing of 
open roles for Firstline athletes to compete 
for corporate roles 
Qualitative Target
People Representation & Hiring
Our firstline athletes
can access programs
to learn more about
the business while
upskilling.
“During Pride month, we created 
space for members from our first line 
to come out to teammates and share 
their personal stories. These moments 
further my passion to do more, to push 
more and to be a part of more so all 
employees can be their truest and most 
authentic selves. I want to inspire others 
to believe in themselves, by being my 
own authentic self.” 
Sharron Cairns
Athlete Voice Manager, 
EMEA NAX
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
39 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
THE ACADEMY
The Academy is a one-year rotational 
program that is open to both past and 
present U.S. retail store managers and 
assistant store managers. Participants 
spend four months working at the manager 
level across three business functions, 
allowing for exposure across all of NIKE 
Direct. At the end of the Academy program 
experience, participants are placed in a fulltime, manager-level role within NIKE Direct, 
North America.
In FY22, The Academy launched its 
fourth cohort, with six total Head Coach 
participants from three different territories. 
The participants had rotations in North 
America store concepts, consumer services 
and online-to-offline (O2O), and landed 
full-time, manager-level roles in Unite, Live, 
consumer services, NAX and O2O. We also 
expanded the eligibility for the FY23 cohort 
of The Academy to include our Assistant 
Head Coach population.
RETAIL EXPERIENCE 
PROGRAM (REP)
REP invests in the development of our 
Firstline athletes through a four-month 
program within NIKE tech and digital 
disciplines that leverages their retail 
experiences. After completing the REP, 
individuals return to stores with an 
opportunity to apply what they have learned 
as they continue to build their career in retail 
or at WHQ.
In FY22, REP had three new cohorts of eight 
individuals – totaling 24 participants. Two 
participants achieved promotions to in-store 
leadership and four participants were hired 
into roles at WHQ after the program.
TRACK STRETCH HQ
The main objective of Track Stretch HQ is to 
provide exposure and experience of various 
career paths for our Firstline athletes across 
a breadth of functions at WHQ through 
a six-month development experience 
stretch. Our Firstline athletes bring their 
strong marketplace, product and consumer 
knowledge into the corporate environment, 
and at the end of the stretch experience, 
participants return to their store and roles 
with an opportunity to apply what they 
have learned.
Sixteen cohorts, totaling 81 employees, 
participated in the program in FY22 
compared to 53 participants in FY21. 
Twenty participants were hired into new 
full-time employee roles: two within the 
store and 18 at WHQ. These metrics highlight 
that Track Stretch HQ is a great platform 
to create exposure and engagement for 
Firstline athletes to find their future path 
– creating the potential future leaders of 
NIKE from within. We also expanded and 
scaled the Track Stretch HQ framework to 
Asia-Pacific and Latin America (APLA) and 
Greater China, creating a consistent and 
equitable experience for our Firstline retail 
athletes globally to stretch from retail to a 
corporate role. 
People Representation & Hiring
Retail Experience 
Program 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
40 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
TRACK 
STRETCH RETAIL
In FY22, we piloted Track Stretch Retail 
to serve those interested in growing their 
career within retail – creating an experience 
for in-store retail stretches with structured 
onboarding and a curated learning journey 
through the cohort model. The initial 
program had 11 participants from 10 stores, 
of whom four participants were promoted 
to the retail leadership roles they were 
stretching into. We are planning to scale 
this program to all of North America in 
FY23 and allow the framework to inform 
in-store stretch experiences across 
other geographies.
UNIFIED FIRSTLINE
Unified Firstline was another net-new 
program in FY22, designed to bridge 
the gap between physical and digital 
consumer service, enabling our parttime athletes to expand their skills and 
capabilities developed in stores by also 
serving consumers digitally on our nike.com 
and NIKE app channels as NIKE experts 
on demand. This program is exclusive to our 
part-time population, in partnership with the 
Consumer Services team in North America. 
The pilot cohort had 10 part-time athletes 
participating, two of whom saw career 
growth moves to WHQ roles in Consumer 
Services. The program is approved to 
continue into FY23.
In addition to employee experience 
programs, we have also updated our 
approach by providing greater visibility 
into Gateway roles, which are functional 
roles at WHQ that are a good match for the 
transferable interests of Firstline employees. 
While our NAX efforts are specifically for 
our Firstline retail teammates, Gateway 
roles are accessible to all employees (in 
retail, distribution centers and Air MI). 
The NAX and Recruiting Programs team 
partnered with functions to identify roles 
and job families that would make good 
Gateway roles and then made these roles 
visible to Firstline employees on an ongoing 
basis. Firstline employees can now view 
a curated list of open corporate roles that 
match their interests on the external NIKE 
careers site, so that they may easily find and 
apply for open roles and participate in the 
competitive process.
People Representation & Hiring
NIKE Track Stretch 
teammates
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
41 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
NIKE’s total rewards are designed to sustain 
a culture in which everyone feels included, 
empowered and rewarded for the success 
we create as a team. Our competitive and 
equitable total rewards aim to meet the 
diverse needs of our global teammates and 
reinforce our values.
A personalized and holistic rewards system 
is essential to attracting, inspiring and 
developing premier talent. We link pay to 
company performance, demonstrated 
and expected individual performance, 
contributions and impact, and key talent 
needs for NIKE’s long-term growth. 
Company performance plays a significant 
role in our short-term and long-term 
incentives; individual performance informs 
rewards like base pay increases and 
milestone bonuses, as well as promotions 
into roles with more scope and responsibility.
Maintain 100% pay equity across all 
employee levels on an annual basis
Quantitative Target (Corporate)
1:1
men/women 
1:1
white/U.S. racial 
and ethnic minorities
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
42 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
COMPETITIVE AND 
EQUITABLE PAY We believe that competitive and equitable 
rewards go hand in hand while recognizing 
that pay can be managed and assessed in a 
number of ways. Each year, NIKE analyzes 
benchmark data from other leading global 
companies to inform salary investments and 
adjust pay rates and ranges.
During FY21, we implemented a minimum 
hourly rate of $15 for retail store teammates 
in North America and in FY22 we increased 
our starting hourly rates for store employees 
across EMEA and Mexico. We also 
increased hourly rates to $18 for distribution 
center employees in North America in FY22. 
At NIKE, we define pay equity as equal 
compensation for employees who undertake 
the same work at the same career level, 
location, experience and performance. 
Globally, we assess this across gender, 
and in the U.S., we also assess this across 
racial and ethnic minorities. Since signing 
the White House Equal Pay Pledge in 2016, 
we have developed an ongoing discipline 
of reviewing our pay practices annually to 
achieve and maintain pay equity for our 
approximately 80,000 teammates across 
all geographies, functions and business 
units. Our FY22 data shows that NIKE has 
maintained 1:1 pay equity. Since FY20, for 
every $1 earned by men, women globally 
earned $1, and for every $1 earned by white 
employees in the U.S., racial and ethnic 
minority employees earned $1. 
We did that through competitive pay 
assessment. An investment was also made 
in merit increases to enable continued 
market competitiveness. We are reviewing 
and refreshing our internal pay infrastructure 
to strengthen market relevancy and 
competitive positioning in an ever-changing 
external macro environment. We have made 
additional investments in high-performing 
talent, aligning to their performance 
and potential.
OUR COMMITMENT 
TO TRANSPARENCY Transparency at NIKE is the sharing of 
relevant information to drive better decisions 
related to pay – for employees, leaders and 
candidates. We believe that by infusing 
transparency into our policies and practices, 
we build trust and accountability – both of 
which are integral to our culture. 
In FY22, we enhanced our commitment 
to educate employees on talent and pay 
practices – creating expanded resources 
and hosting live training sessions. The 
goal of these global information sessions 
was to strengthen manager capability 
and confidence in having productive pay 
conversations. The live training sessions 
were well received, with managers reporting 
greater understanding and increased 
comfort levels educating their teams 
on how pay decisions are made. 
People Pay & Benefits
Knoxville retail 
athletes 
Growing up in my small Northern California town, there wasn’t 
a girls’ soccer team for me to join. Now we have the eyes of 
the world on Women’s Championship matches. Our games are 
breaking global records of attendance. That’s what progress 
looks like, and what it means to be acknowledged. When I was 
young, I could play on boys’ teams and I was able to find my feet, 
hone my craft, and discover my gift. That was before off-the-field 
comments made it clear that many thought girls shouldn’t com- pete with boys, let alone beat them. But I kept playing, and win- ning, and fighting my way onto teams where I not only felt like I 
belonged, but began to understand that I had an critical role to 
play. As I rose to play on the U.S. Women’s National Soccer Team, 
so did the public’s interest in women’s soccer; what still needs to 
increase is equal pay for Women across the board. That’s why I 
use my skill as a player and my voice as an athlete to ask what 
true equity looks like, so that we are not leaving anyone behind. 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Megan Rapinoe
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
43 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
Growing up in my small Northern California town, 
there wasn’t a girls’ soccer team for me to join. 
Now we have the eyes of the world on Women’s 
Championship matches. Our games are breaking 
global records of attendance. That’s what progress 
looks like, and what it means to be acknowledged.
When I was young, I could play on boys’ teams 
and I was able to find my feet, hone my craft and 
discover my gift. That was before off-the-field 
comments made it clear that many thought girls 
shouldn’t compete with boys, let alone beat them. 
But I kept playing, and winning, and fighting my 
way onto teams where I not only felt like I belonged, 
but began to understand that I had an critical role 
to play. 
As I rose to play on the U.S. Women’s National 
Soccer Team, so did the public’s interest in 
women’s soccer; what still needs to increase is 
equal pay for women across the board. That’s why 
I use my skill as a player and my voice as an athlete 
to ask what true equity looks like, so that we are 
not leaving anyone behind.
Playing alongside amazing athletes, like my 
teammate Quinn, pushes me to the edge of my 
game. They, along with other trailblazing members 
of the trans community, are shining a light on the 
importance of authenticity and belonging. And 
what it means to show up as your whole self. 
Creating that sense of belonging, for everyone 
in the next generation, is as important to me as 
playing the best game I can. I appreciate the steps 
Nike is taking inside its business, and beyond, to 
prioritize inclusivity, and give all voices a moment to 
be heard. And even more can be done.
Our society today can only be stronger, when we 
are more inclusive – in how we see each other, 
and champion one another. That is a future worth 
fighting for.
“I use my skill as a player and my voice as 
an athlete to ask what true equity looks like, 
so that we are not leaving anyone behind.”
Stand strong, 
Megan
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
44 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
45 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
We believe benefits should be 
comprehensive and inclusive. To best 
serve our diverse team of approximately 
80,000 employees, we offer a variety of 
benefits so teammates can choose the 
best options for their life and family. 
We design inclusive, value-driven 
programs and practices that anticipate 
and serve the needs of teammates at all 
stages of life and positively impact their 
well-being. Our decisions and program 
design are guided by NIKE’s values and 
goals, employee insights and feedback, 
and market data.
Provide competitive and equitable 
benefits for all employees 
Qualitative Target
Appreciation Day at 
NIKE Korea office
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
46 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
94%
of NIKE employees value 
the benefits offered to them
92%
were satisfied or very satisfied 
with the mental healthcare 
approach meeting their needs
NIKE employees 
have access to 
family-building 
benefits
− In FY22, NIKE teammates and their 
dependents engaged in more than 
35,000 counseling sessions.
− NIKE offers a variety of family-building 
benefits – including fertility treatment, 
adoption and surrogacy coverage – to 
support all paths to parenthood. During 
FY22, we expanded our fertility benefits 
through Progyny, Inc. so U.S. NIKE 
teammates now have access to unlimited 
“Smart Cycles” for fertility services 
like IVF, egg retrieval, sperm freezing, 
and more.
− We offer inclusive family-planning 
benefits and transgender care, including 
travel costs when services are not 
available locally. Our comprehensive 
transgender healthcare is inclusive of 
services recommended in the latest World 
Professional Association for Transgender 
Health (WPATH) standards of care 
and includes access to a dedicated 
transgender healthcare advocate to help 
navigate care and insurance coverage.
EVOLVING 
OUR BENEFITS 
A big part of supporting our teammates is 
listening to their feedback to inform what we 
offer. We’re always asking ourselves whether 
our programs and practices are having the 
desired impact and where we can improve.
During FY22, we introduced several new and 
enhanced offerings: 
− We launched a new benefit with Lyra 
Health to provide mental health support 
for our employees in the U.S. With Lyra, 
employees have access to timely care 
through a high-quality and diverse 
provider network, as well as guided selfcare and meditations. Ninety-two percent 
were satisfied or very satisfied with the 
care approach meeting their needs.
− At the same time, NIKE expanded its 
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 
so that all global employees and their 
family members have access to 20 fully 
covered therapy sessions per year. 
EAP counselors are carefully chosen 
and trained to support mental health, 
substance abuse, marital and family 
challenges, depression, anxiety, building 
stress resiliency and achieving balance. 
Confidential support is available 24/7. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
47 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
NIKE Live 
Kings Road
Beyond COVID-19, we support employees 
in a variety of ways during times of crisis. 
− NIKE provides pay continuity when stores 
or operations need to close due to natural 
disasters or other unforeseen situations. 
− We provide mental health support 
through our EAP with individual, group 
or onsite counseling. 
− Through our Natural Disaster Assistance 
program, we provide financial and lodging 
support to employees who have been 
severely impacted by a natural disaster. 
− NIKE matches employees’ cash 
donations to organizations supporting 
those affected by the crisis through Give 
Your Best, the company’s employee 
giving platform.
To support teammates impacted by the 
war in Ukraine, we provided pay continuity 
to retail employees when stores were 
closed, continued access to life insurance 
and provided additional EAP support 
to teammates across EMEA who were 
affected by the conflict. 
CRISIS SUPPORT
We continue to support our employees 
through challenges related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
During FY22, we extended and replenished 
our COVID Sick Leave policy, which – in 
addition to existing paid time off benefits 
– provides up to two regularly scheduled 
work weeks of paid sick leave. Teammates 
can take COVID Sick Leave when they 
experience symptoms associated with 
COVID-19, need to take time off to care for 
their children due to school or childcare 
closure, or need time away to prioritize their 
mental and emotional well-being.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic and 
related challenges, NIKE absorbed 
healthcare premium increases for the past 
two years, so NIKE teammates were able 
to continue their coverage at the same cost 
year-over-year.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
48 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
NIKE offers a range 
of benefits to support 
the emotional, 
physical and 
financial well-being 
of our teammates 
and their families.
As champions of physical well-being, 
we encourage employees to make sport 
a daily habit by providing free access 
to NIKE Sports Centers, wide-ranging 
fitness discounts and comprehensive 
preventive programs, healthcare and 
family building benefits. 
To support the financial well-being of our 
teammates, we offer unlimited free financial 
coaching through Ernst & Young, as well as a 
401(k) match, scholarship programs, tuition 
reimbursement, dependent care subsidies, 
performance bonuses, stock purchase plans 
and more. 
NIKE offers workplace flexibility and 
generous time off, including half-day Fridays 
throughout the summer and a closing of 
our corporate offices for a dedicated WellBeing Week in August where we take time 
off together as a team to focus on our wellbeing, plus Well-Being Days for teammates 
in our retail stores and distribution centers.
NIKE WELL-BEING 
BENEFITS
NIKE continues to prioritize and invest in 
the holistic well-being of our employees 
and their families, supporting their physical, 
emotional and financial well-being. 
From mental health support to unlimited free 
financial coaching – and, of course, access 
to sport – we are committed to helping our 
teammates live their most fulfilling lives – 
at work and outside of it. When we support 
the well-being of our employees and inspire 
each individual to be their best self, we do 
our best work as a team.
To support emotional well-being, NIKE 
offers 20 free therapy and coaching sessions 
to employees and their family members 
through Lyra Health and EAP, as well as 
a range of meditation, mindfulness and 
caregiving resources. We also offer onsite 
EAP support at our distribution centers. 
NIKE is also a proud supporter of Crisis 
Text Line, a nonprofit that provides free 
24/7 crisis counseling via text messaging.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
49 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Pay & Benefits
NIKE 
Well-Being Hub
As a community, we are deeply committed 
to helping break down the stigma associated 
with mental health and promoting habits 
that nourish mind and body in everyday life. 
One of the ways we do that is by engaging 
our NIKE family in conversations about 
mental health.
We frequently invite athletes to join 
employee meetings so our teams around 
the world can hear firsthand about their 
mental health and well-being strategies. 
In FY22, we also produced a new podcast, 
No Off-Season, where our partners from 
Crisis Text Line interview NIKE athletes 
about their mental health journeys. Episodes 
feature candid conversations with athletes 
such as Laurie Hernandez, Raven Saunders 
and Karl-Anthony Towns. 
MENTAL HEALTH 
& EMOTIONAL
WELL-BEING
During FY22, amid the ongoing pandemic 
and in conjunction with our return to 
the workplace in many locations, we 
intentionally focused our investments 
and energy on mental health. Based 
on employee feedback, we evolved our 
approach to support the well-being of 
our retail store and distribution center 
teammates and introduced dedicated 
Well-Being Days for teammates to use 
at their convenience. We also launched 
a new internal Well-Being Hub to make 
it easy for teammates to find inspiration, 
events, resources and benefits to 
support their well-being.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
50 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
RETURN TO 
THE WORKPLACE
Well-being was a core element of our return 
to the workplace in FY22. In addition to 
offering over 60 days’ notice of our return 
date, we offered a ramp-up period to allow 
employees an opportunity to gradually 
reacclimate to the office. We also returned 
in a new 3/2 hybrid work approach for the 
majority of employees – three days a week 
in the office and two from home. Employees 
in the 3/2 work approach also benefit from 
Four Week Flex – an opportunity to work 
from another location of their choice up to 
four weeks per year. 
As teammates returned to campus and 
work locations around the world, we offered 
mindfulness and meditation activities 
alongside our fitness facilities and classes. 
We also continued our virtual offerings for 
a subset of our employees who are a part 
of the remote work approach as well as 
people in other locations around the world. 
In addition, we intentionally re-onboarded 
teammates who had joined NIKE during 
the pandemic, and provided resources 
for leaders and teams supporting hybrid 
work and new ways of working as they 
transitioned. In the fall of FY22, we continued 
to provide onsite access to flu shots and 
COVID-19 boosters.
CULTURE & 
LEADERSHIP
We believe it’s our responsibility to maintain 
an inclusive, empathetic culture where every 
employee can be their most authentic self – 
and that means creating a safe place where 
we can be vulnerable, ask for help and admit 
when we’re not okay.
Our leaders strive to model behaviors and 
create an environment where employees feel 
empowered to prioritize their well-being. We 
celebrate leaders who lead with a well-being 
mindset and train leaders around the world 
on how to model behaviors that best support 
their team. Many of our most senior leaders 
have been open about their own mental 
health experiences and routines, which 
has helped advance the dialogue among 
employees and teams.
We partner closely with our NikeUNITED and 
ConverseUNITED Networks to understand 
the unique well-being challenges facing 
diverse communities, and we strive to 
provide resources to meet those needs. 
During FY22, we scheduled dedicated EAP 
sessions with specialized counselors for 
several of our networks, including the Black 
Employee Network, Ascend Network, Pride 
Network, NIKE Military Veterans Network 
and more. 
People Pay & Benefits
NIKE new hire 
fitness class
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
51 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Inclusive Culture & Engagement 
At NIKE, we are committed to creating 
an engaging and inclusive culture where 
all teammates can authentically express 
themselves, become their best selves 
and reach their full potential.
In FY22, we continued to measure 
employee engagement and our culture of 
belonging through our annual All-Employee 
Engagement survey and several corporate 
pulse surveys and listening sessions focused 
on topics that are important to employees, 
including well-being, career progression and 
culture. The results show the Engagement 
and Inclusion Indexes are strong and 
stable, and employees continue to respond 
favorably to NIKE’s support of their changing 
needs while creating a culture of inclusion 
and belonging.
Top quartile of benchmarked companies 
for both engagement and inclusion 
Quantitative Target
Average % favorability 
in engagement
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
Average % favorability
in inclusion
80% 79% 75% 77%
Top Quartile Benchmark
 83%
Top Quartile Benchmark
 82%
As part of our strategic focus on building a 
leading internal employee listening function, 
in FY22 we moved to a new survey platform 
and benchmark provider. Due to this change, 
this year we are reporting the percentage 
of employees who agree or strongly agree 
(on a five-point scale), while in prior years 
we reported percentiles. Additionally, we are 
unable to report on a full Global Inclusion 
Index benchmark. However, we can 
compare to a global benchmark for a subset 
of our Inclusion Index (four out of six items). 
For that subset of items, favorability was 
77% in FY22, up two percentage points from 
FY21 and five percentage points below the 
75th-percentile benchmark. The two items 
within our Global Inclusion Index that do not 
have benchmarks provide further insight 
into the holistic, felt experience of inclusion 
at NIKE. Moving forward, we will continue 
to evaluate and enhance our survey strategy 
and inclusion measures to best represent 
our employees’ voices and experiences as 
part of our continued commitment to our 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion priorities.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
52 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Inclusive Culture & Engagement 
We also introduced dedicated Well-Being 
Days for retail and distribution center 
teammates to use when it’s convenient 
for them. And we continued our Summer 
Fridays, when employees are encouraged 
to stop working around noon on Fridays 
throughout the summer. We believe taking 
time to step away from work is important 
to help our employees be healthy, creative 
and productive.
− We also expanded NIKE’s digital learning 
platform, The Source, to increase 
employee development through curated 
learning experiences.
FY22 was also a significant year in our 
company’s history. We celebrated our 50th 
anniversary and hosted a series of events 
to show our appreciation to our employees, 
partners and the communities we serve. We 
hosted “Appreciation Days” in offices and on 
campuses around the world, reconnecting 
employees to our purpose with engaging 
programming that started in April and 
continued through September with Just Do It 
(JDI) Day and the Maxim Awards ceremony. 
FY22 also marked our return to the 
workplace with a new hybrid model for our 
corporate employees. We hosted a series of 
events that eased the transition back to the 
workplace and strengthened the bonds that 
we have as NIKE employees. For example, 
we hosted a Welcome Week Experience 
for U.S.-based corporate employees hired 
between March 2020 and April 2022. The 
experience included events, campus tours 
and giveaways to help newer employees feel 
connected to NIKE and their new workplace. 
And we continued to host a series of virtual 
offerings for employees who are a part of the 
remote work approach or in other locations 
around the world (see Pay & Benefits and 
Well-Being sections for more details). 
We are committed to addressing the needs of 
all employees, but we place a strong focus on 
supporting underrepresented groups through 
our pillars of representation, education, 
development and creating community. 
NIKE EMEA 
Festival of Sport
EMPLOYEE 
ENGAGEMENT
We continued to focus on employee 
engagement in FY22, including building 
out a rigorous employee voice program 
to gather more frequent feedback and 
drive meaningful action and promoting key 
programs that aim to enhance the employee 
experience in a holistic way. For example: 
− Benefits to support teammates’ emotional, 
physical and financial well-being (see Pay 
& Benefits section for more details). 
− Launched a new internal Well-Being Hub 
to make it easy for teammates to find 
inspiration, events, resources and benefits 
to support their well-being. 
− Well-Being Week/Days & Summer 
Fridays: For the second year in a row, we 
encouraged employees to participate in 
Well-Being Week, when the company 
closes its corporate offices and Air MI 
facilities for a full week in the summer. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
53 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
DIVERSITY 
AND INCLUSION
As covered in greater depth throughout 
the People section of this report, we 
continued to promote diversity and 
inclusion in FY22, including:
− Increasing representation at all levels 
of the organization.
− Creating DEI learning and development 
programming internally through the 
NikeUNITED Networks and externally 
through our DEI partners. 
− Expanding the DEI mentorship program 
for U.S. corporate employees.
− Increasing accessibility efforts to create 
equitable and inclusive experiences for 
our employees with disabilities. As a 
result, NIKE was recognized as a “Best 
Place to Work for Disability Inclusion” 
with a score of 100 on the Disability:IN 
Disability Equality Index – a globally 
recognized benchmarking tool to 
evaluate disability inclusion and equality.
− Achieving recognition as one of the Best 
Places to Work for LGBTQ+ employees for 
the 20th consecutive year on the Human 
Rights Campaign’s Corporate Equality 
Index. NIKE is one of only seven out of 
more than 1,200 participating companies 
to achieve a 100% rating for the last two 
decades. The Corporate Equality Index 
is the preeminent national benchmarking 
tool on corporate policies, practices and 
benefits pertinent to LGBTQ+ employees, 
and the primary driving force for LGBTQ+ 
workplace inclusion. 
NIKE contingent 
at the Portland 
Pride Parade
People Inclusive Culture & Engagement 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
54 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Inclusive Culture & Engagement 
We have a long history of disability inclusion 
at NIKE, from hiring disabled employees to 
sponsoring adaptive athletes and innovating 
new products such as FlyEase. To deepen 
our strategic commitment, NIKE established 
the Accessibility Center of Excellence (CoE) 
to lead our global enterprise strategy on 
accessibility and disability inclusion. Our 
vision is to create an accessible, inclusive 
experience for all athletes* because if 
you have a body, you are an athlete, and 
that includes people with disabilities. Our 
mission is to foster disability inclusion that 
drives innovation in collaboration with the 
disability community. 
Our global enterprise approach brings 
together teams from across NIKE. We run a 
hub and spoke model with the Accessibility 
CoE collaborating with business units to 
drive forward accessibility and disability 
inclusion because we win as a team.
Continue to focus on improving access 
to athletes of all abilities for our brand, 
our experiences, our product, our 
facilities and our company
Qualitative Target
NIKE EMEA 
Festival of Sport
“I am a proud disabled leader who is 
honored to champion accessibility in all 
things we do. We help create a strong 
disability culture by driving accessibility 
for our employees and consumers, 
because we know disabilities are a 
strength at NIKE. We push boundaries 
of what is possible to ensure the 
disability community is part of NIKE.”
Dr. Megan Lawrence
Global Director of 
Accessibility and 
Disability Inclusion 
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
55 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Inclusive Culture & Engagement 
The Accessibility CoE focuses on four 
areas of strategic investment:
1 Disability Employee Experience to 
strengthen the disability experiences 
across the employee lifecycle 
2 Accessibility Innovation to engage in 
accessible design and create products 
built for one and extended to many
3 Inclusive Brand to elevate authentic 
stories of people with disabilities and 
community connections
4 Direct to Disabled Consumer to 
accelerate access and support 
to the NIKE ecosystem with the 
disability community 
Accessibility is part of NIKE’s DEI 
commitment. We know that disability is part 
of diversity and that accessibility creates 
equitable experiences which, in turn, drive 
inclusion. NIKE is recognized as a “Best 
Place to Work for Disability Inclusion” with a 
score of 100 (up from 90 the previous year) 
on the Disability:IN Disability Equality Index 
– a globally recognized benchmarking tool. 
We channel our efforts in three areas:
Product
Our FlyEase sneakers are created with 
insights from the disability community. 
FlyEase technology makes it seamless to 
put shoes on with no hands and/or easily 
with limited interaction. First came the 
FlyEase LeBron Soldier 10. But we didn’t 
stop there. We now have a FlyEase model 
of many of our sneakers, across price 
points, to support independent living and 
self-expression for people with disabilities. 
We have continued to scale these learnings 
across our products, and this year launched 
our Dynamo Go sneakers and our adaptive 
clothing line for kids. 
People
At the heart of the Accessibility CoE are 
people – including our disabled employee 
community and the consumers we connect 
with every day. We know that representation 
matters. In celebration of disability and 
sport, we launched our new adaptive 
workouts on the NIKE Training Club (NTC) 
with adaptive athlete Amy Bream. The 
classes were created with accessibility and 
adaptive workouts in mind, all designed 
for people with and without a disability. 
Program
In collaboration with our Social Community 
Impact team we provide grants to disability 
organizations across the world. Mental 
health, for example, is a disability with 
global impacts, and NIKE partners with 
several mental health organizations. One 
such group is the Ben Raemers Foundation, 
which highlights how skateboarding can 
help people develop the skills and tools 
needed to support themselves and each 
other as well as to help understand and 
address mental health through community 
and sport. 
NIKE FlyEase Go
In sport, and in life, it’s easy to let your own doubts weigh you down; 
to tell yourself you don’t have what it takes. I envision a world where 
everyone believes in the endless opportunity in being told you 
“don’t have what it takes.” When I lost my lower legs and forearms 
to meningitis at 11 years old, I was sure my dreams of fencing had 
come to an end. I knew so much was going to change; that I was 
going to have to put my foil down. I’d tell myself, “Gold medalists in 
fencing need their arms and can’t be in wheelchairs.” 
Then my mother told me something that turned my world upside 
down (in a good way, don’t worry!). “Fencing, like art, lives in your 
mind, not your hands,” she said. This stuck with me. It made me 
question everything around me. It made me believe that just because 
everyone else does something in a specific way, it doesn’t mean that 
I have to. 
I stand proudly today as an athlete with a disability. I’ve not only 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Bebe Vio
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
56 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
En garde, 
Bebe
“I envision a world where everyone believes 
in the endless opportunity in being told you 
‘don’t have what it takes.’”
In sport, and in life, it’s easy to let your own doubts 
weigh you down – to tell yourself you don’t have 
what it takes. I envision a world where everyone 
believes in the endless opportunity in being told 
you “don’t have what it takes.”
When I lost my lower legs and forearms to 
meningitis at 11 years old, I was sure my dreams 
of fencing had come to an end. I knew so much 
was going to change – that I was going to 
have to put my foil down. I’d tell myself, “Gold 
medalists in fencing need their arms and can’t be 
in wheelchairs.” 
Then my mother told me something that turned my 
world upside down (in a good way, don’t worry!). 
“Fencing, like art, lives in your mind, not your 
hands,” she said. This stuck with me. It made me 
question everything around me. It made me believe 
that just because everyone else does something in 
a specific way, it doesn’t mean that I have to. 
I stand proudly today as an athlete with a disability. 
I’ve not only found my own way, but I have the 
privilege of standing on the shoulders of those 
who wouldn’t let adversity take them down. This 
includes my family, coaches and mentors who 
believe in me. And NIKE, who like me, understands 
that good coaches can help kids see their potential. 
In 2021, I founded the Bebe Vio Academy and NIKE 
has been my partner to help grow the Paralympic 
movement in Italy. I want athletes like me, and the 
medalists of tomorrow, to live in a world where the 
only limitations they have are their imaginations. 
When I, as the only fencer in the world who 
competes without arms in a wheelchair, won 
my second Paralympic gold medal I realized 
something. To change the world, we have to let 
those who look up to us in on the most beautiful 
secret: Our imaginations – our minds – are what will 
create a safer, more equitable world for everyone 
regardless of ability, or disability, origin, skin color, 
sexual orientation or gender identity. 
I firmly believe imagination is the most powerful 
way to bring people along on our journey.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
57 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Future Address
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
58 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Additional Priority Area: Occupational Health & Safety
NIKE Air MI 
worker wearing 
personal protective 
equipment
Our approach to occupational health and 
safety (OH&S) rests on several foundational 
pillars that we use to monitor our facilities’ 
adherence to our Foundational Expectations:
1 NIKE’s Environment, Health and Safety 
(EHS) Policy
2 NIKE’s Code of Conduct
3 NIKE Code Leadership Standards
4 Local laws wherever we or our 
suppliers operate
Certain NIKE owned and operated facilities 
undergo external audits and internal 
assessments. When those processes reveal 
gaps in EHS standard implementation, we 
initiate management plans and develop tools 
to address and correct those problems.
Occupational Health & Safety 
Additional Priority Area
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
59 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
NIKE OWNED 
AND OPERATED 
FACILITIES
In FY22, COVID-19 response continued to 
be a priority and a dominant component of 
our work over the year. Our mitigation efforts 
spanned the globe and touched all functions 
and locations. NIKE procured and distributed 
more than 200,000 self-administered 
COVID-19 tests free of charge to employees 
and contractors. We hosted COVID-19 and 
flu vaccine clinics for both employees and 
family members in the fall of 2021 at many 
of our high-density locations globally. NIKE’s 
provision of face coverings and KN95 masks 
and sanitation supplies also continued in FY22.
COVID-19 notifications and contact tracing 
were universally applied, with isolation and 
quarantine policies that aligned to Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
and local requirements. We closed out FY22 
with the return to workplace for our corporate 
office employees. The response will continue 
into FY23 with newfound support and 
resources to manage day-to-day governance 
as we return our focus to core EHS initiatives 
and objectives.
NIKE focused on updating life safety programs 
in FY22 with a focus on occupational health, 
emergency medical response programs 
and injury prevention. In Greater China, we 
partnered with International SOS to procure 
and install automated external defibrillator 
People Additional Priority Areas: Occupational Health & Safety
systems across 11 office locations – a deal 
that included embedded training content. 
Our North America distribution center 
facilities implemented 24/7 onsite registered 
nurse and emergency medical technician 
oversight through a combination of internal 
and third-party vendor services. Air MI 
locations embarked upon a comprehensive 
injury-prevention program that established 
onsite medical suites with licensed 
occupational athletic trainers and injuryprevention specialists to treat and mitigate 
hazards associated with both personal and 
occupational injuries and illnesses. The Air 
MI team also launched an employee-wide 
culture of safety campaign focused on eight 
SAFE (Safety and Accountability for Everyone) 
principles. The program includes employeeled training and individual commitments, 
ensuring safety is an everyday commitment. 
Our Innovation EHS team elevated chemistry 
and machine safety programs across all units 
with an enhanced job safety assessment 
digital application for equipment and machine 
safety operations.
LOOKING AHEAD
In FY23, NIKE plans to launch its Global Office 
Safety program within select key city locations 
around the world. The program provides 
each NIKE office location with systems and 
tools to effectively implement injury response 
and reporting, life safety programs, EHS 
committee function and robust ergonomic 
management systems. 
Establishing baseline assessments across our 
globally owned and operated locations will not 
only aid in legal compliance with local EHS 
regulatory requirements, but also serve as 
NIKE’s foundational baseline and complement 
existing conformance assessments conducted 
in accordance with NIKE Code Leadership 
Standards and industry-wide Social & Labor 
Convergence Program (SLCP) assessments 
for certain participating facilities. 
We will be partnering with industry experts to 
develop site-specific Emergency Response 
Plans for all NIKE owned and operated 
locations, which will include hazard-specific 
protocols in addition to updated evacuation 
procedures, maps and complementary first 
aid, automated external defibrillator, CPR 
and fire extinguisher education.
With a renewed focus on employee awareness 
and individual preparedness, NIKE is working 
to secure and offer Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration online training course 
content globally through the NIKE University 
learning management system.
We are also continuing to leverage and expand 
our internal EHS management system, which 
gives employees the ability to report injuries, 
hazards and near misses across our office, 
distribution, retail and manufacturing locations. 
Understanding our leading and lagging 
indicators with regards to EHS performance 
will enable our future investments are made 
against risk-based priorities.
NIKE Air MI 
teammate at work
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
60 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Education & Professional Development
Our overarching objective is to develop 
inclusive leaders who are held accountable 
for fostering our culture of belonging. As 
part of our five-year DEI strategy, in FY21 
we piloted two education programs for our 
Vice Presidents and our NikeUNITED and 
ConverseUNITED Network Leaders. The 
programs, both rich in dialogue through 
facilitation, generated an appetite for even 
deeper learning around DEI. Leveraging 
the feedback from these two programs, we 
decided to evolve how our Vice Presidents 
are certified and receive their training. To 
renew our commitment, in FY23, we will 
launch Inclusive Leadership education 
certification within our ongoing Vice 
President leadership training, designed 
for all NIKE executives across the globe. 
Additionally, we began development of a 
new custom unconscious bias awareness 
training that will be rolled out to all 
employees, with the goal of 96% completion. 
Disability inclusion is an area in which we 
are also exploring new and innovative ways 
to make content more accessible to our 
employees with disabilities.
100% of Vice Presidents complete 
and be credentialed on Inclusive 
Leadership education
Quantitative Target
We have also worked closely with our 
business and supporting functions to 
provide strategic design consultation on 
topics such as inclusive communication, 
inclusive sponsorship, cultural appreciation 
versus cultural appropriation, and inclusive 
and accessible design. For our Firstline 
distribution and manufacturing teams 
around the globe, we look to expand our 
comprehensive cross-cultural curriculum 
programming, designed for teammates 
in non-traditional work environments to 
advance their DEI acumen and Inclusive 
Leadership skills. The ongoing program has 
focused on race and the impact of culture 
on our personal and work relationships in 
the U.S., Singapore and China. This year, we 
hope to gain a deeper level of understanding 
for our teammates and their experiences in 
Vietnam and Indonesia.
% of VPs credentialed 
on Inclusive Leadership 
education
FY21 FY22
0% 45%
2025 Target
100%
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
61 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Education & Professional Development
Our investment in professional development 
remains a key component of our talent 
strategy. We are investing in the development 
of racial and ethnic minorities in the U.S. 
and women globally at all levels to drive 
career mobility, advancement and retention. 
Our mentorship program, which was 
launched in June 2021, has had two full 
cohorts complete the nine-month program 
while maintaining a 98% satisfaction rate 
among participants. Given the success of 
the program in the corporate environment, 
we are partnering with our Firstline teams 
to modify the program, with an aim to pilot 
in FY23. Additionally, we have invested in a 
technology platform to facilitate matching 
of mentorship pairs. 
2x investments focused on professional 
development for racial and ethnic minorities 
in the U.S. and women globally
Quantitative Target
$ invested on professional 
development
FY21 FY22
1.1X
$85,000
9.0X
$685,475
2025 Target
2X 
$152,000
FY20 Baseline ($76,000)
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
62 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Education & Professional Development
We also began researching vendors for 
targeted leadership development for Native 
American and Indigenous leaders with plans 
to launch a new program in FY23 for this 
specific demographic. We are partnering 
with CultureAlly and American Indigenous 
Business Leaders (AIBL), along with the 
NikeUNITED Networks’ Native American 
Network leadership team to design and 
create this new program.
We also launched a monthly career 
development series for the NikeUNITED 
and ConverseUNITED Networks to 
further amplify the network membership 
experience and increase resourcing for 
our internal communities at NIKE. This is 
an opt-in, career development series for 
network members and leadership teams 
to advance their suite of skills and increase 
their personal growth, in conjunction 
with external organizations like Bleeker, 
Out Leadership, Hispanic Association on 
Corporate Responsibility and Workplace 
Change. Topics included goal setting, 
storytelling, the art of negotiation and 
conflict resolution, and the series amplified 
the network membership experience through 
increasing the available resources for NIKE’s 
internal communities. The curriculum aligned 
with Leadership Defined behaviors and key 
career moments during NIKE’s fiscal year to 
prepare teammates for career conversations 
and planning. We had over 2,000 attendees 
over the course of 11 months, with an 
85% satisfaction rate overall.
Finally, we are investing in professional 
development of potential talent outside of 
NIKE through our partnerships with The Asian 
American Foundation (TAAF), Management 
Leadership for Tomorrow and OneTen. NIKE 
has a four-year community grant agreement 
with TAAF, worth $5 million – $1 million per 
year over five years (2020–2025). In FY22 
we committed to OneTen, whose mission 
is to hire, promote and advance one million 
Black individuals without four-year degrees 
into family-sustaining careers over the next 
10 years. We are focused on developing a 
strategy to connect with our talent acquisition 
team and identify key roles that fit OneTen 
eligibility, with the goal of hiring in FY23.
Diversity, Equity 
and Inclusion 
Leadership 
Aceeleration 
Academy
As part of our opt-in Focused Leadership 
Development program we expanded 
two external relationships with McKinsey 
& Company Executive Leadership and 
Leadership Education for Asian Pacifics 
(LEAP). Through our work with McKinsey, 
we have had 40 participants complete the 
Black, Asian and Hispanic Management 
Accelerators programs and 12 complete the 
McKinsey & Company Executive Leadership 
Program. Across all of our associations we 
have had over 200 underrepresented leaders 
throughout the enterprise participate in 
leadership development opportunities with 
the goal to grow future executive leaders. 
We continue to enhance and expand our 
external relationships in efforts to offer 
world-class programming designed to meet 
the changing needs of our talent. In FY22 we 
added a new senior development program 
in conjunction with our partner CNEXT, and 
began building a custom leadership program 
for executive leadership, which we aim to roll 
out in FY23. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
63 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Business Diversity & Inclusion 
Business Diversity & Inclusion (BDI) is more 
than the right thing to do; it delivers strategic 
business results. Suppliers are players on 
our team and a diverse team is a winning 
team. During FY22, NIKE increased supplier 
access, drove strategy awareness across 
the enterprise and expanded programs to 
fuel the development of diverse suppliers.
Our approach to business growth is 
fueled by the belief that diversity – in all its 
forms – fosters creativity and accelerates 
innovation. We know that leveraging 
different perspectives, experiences and 
backgrounds generates unique ideas and 
makes our value chain stronger. To enable 
this work, we will continue to build a roster 
of suppliers who can actively support our 
business requirements, while also sharing 
our commitment to DEI.
$1 billion cumulative spend 
on diverse suppliers
Quantitative Target
$ spent on 
diverse suppliers
FY21
FY22
$282
M
$495
M
$777M
2025 Target (Cumulative)
$1
B
 “As a graduate of a women’s college and 
a collegiate athlete*, my life goal has 
always been to use the power that sport 
has to bring people together to change 
the world. I feel grateful that I have 
the opportunity to create meaningful 
impact in the lives of diverse business 
owners by giving them insights to 
build sustained business relationships 
with NIKE.”
Abigail Schleichkorn
Global Business Diversity 
& Inclusion Program 
Operations Lead
People Profile
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
64 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Our strategy is based on three 
critical elements:
1 Drive accessibility and development – 
expand visibility to diverse suppliers 
and build capabilities through coaching 
and training
2 Fuel demand – engage and educate 
our leaders and buyers to proactively 
support BDI efforts
3 Establish internal structure – design 
processes, tools and metrics to embed 
BDI in all procurement decisions
To accelerate progress toward our strategic 
goals, NIKE: 
− Invited over 30,000 diverse suppliers 
from North America to apply for Year 
1 of the Business Diversity Academy, 
dramatically scaling the program from 
six companies to over 75. This program 
is designed to accelerate the capabilities 
of diverse suppliers so that they improve 
their ability to win new business with NIKE 
and other Fortune 500 companies. The 
program helps address the challenges 
many diverse suppliers face in building 
their business, gaining access to new 
opportunities, and presenting themselves 
to corporations. Participants in the 
Business Diversity Academy are often 
located in economically disadvantaged 
communities where the economic 
impact is felt far beyond those who 
complete the program and extends into 
their communities where they employ 
diverse workforces.
− Increased our outreach to diverse 
suppliers by collaborating with supplier 
diversity councils to host “How to Do 
Business with NIKE” webinars and 
attending the National Minority Supplier 
Development Council Conference & 
Exchange in New Orleans.
− Launched an internal training campaign 
to educate our sourcing professionals 
on how to embed BDI principles into 
their process.
To facilitate global expansion into 
EMEA, NIKE:
− Partnered with WEConnect International 
and the Minority Supplier Development 
United Kingdom to help certify diverse 
suppliers in the region. 
− Worked with other corporations and 
supplier diversity counterparts in EMEA 
to determine best practices and support 
diverse businesses across the countries 
and regions.
− Built the foundation of the BDI program 
in the region by integrating the 
strategy into requests for proposals, 
tracking diverse spend and educating 
business stakeholders.
People Business Diversity & Inclusion 
Our commitment to supplier diversity was 
demonstrated across the organization in 
FY22, including, for example:
− We worked with a minority-owned training 
and consulting company to facilitate 
a diverse supplier training program, 
The Academy. 
− To support more minority-owned 
businesses, NIKE encourages our 
suppliers to also engage with their diverse 
supplier network. An example of this 
approach is the LeBron James “Father 
Time” video project, where 91% of the 
subcontractors hired were minorityowned businesses, demonstrating the 
impact that can be made with intentional 
sourcing.
Executing on NIKE’s strategy to increase 
our diverse supplier base and educate our 
buyers resulted in a delivery of $777 million 
cumulative spend on diverse suppliers.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
65 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Health & Safety
In line with the International Labour 
Organization’s (ILO) recently amended 
Declaration on Fundamental Principles 
and Rights at Work, NIKE believes in the 
fundamental right of the protection of life and 
health in the workplace for all people. This is 
a key component of our responsible supply 
chain strategy, which is why we have an 
expectation that suppliers provide safe and 
healthy workplaces for all workers.
100% of strategic suppliers are building 
world-class, safe and healthy workplaces 
for the people making our product
Quantitative Target
% of suppliers with level 3 
health & safety maturity33
FY21 FY22
27% 46%
2025 Target
100%
We focus on fostering a culture of health 
and safety by having leaders and workers 
collaborate to adopt, refine and standardize 
industry-leading safety management 
systems and policies and develop education, 
training, certification programs and safety 
leadership capabilities. 
33 Healthy and safe workplaces: Supplier must reach level 3 safety and health maturity on Culture of Safety Maturity Assessment (COSMA).
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
66 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Health & Safety
ENGAGING AND 
ACTIVATING THE 
WORKFORCE
We believe that a skilled and capable 
workforce is a critical enabler to achieve 
this target. As we continue to develop new 
products and innovate new materials, we 
also create new manufacturing processes 
and adjust workplace safety practices to 
proactively manage new risks. As a part 
of this, health and safety professionals 
must demonstrate a broad range of skills 
and competencies to not only effectively 
manage risk and compliance programs, 
but also foster a culture of health and 
safety in their facilities. 
Strong technical skills combined with 
business and soft skills equip facility 
health and safety personnel with the 
skills they need to improve safety 
performance and influence and drive 
change. In order to support this, we have 
developed programs to upskill individuals 
and improve organizational capabilities, 
which foster peer-to-peer and peer-tomanager conversations about relevant 
health and safety issues within the facility 
and enable workers to be more engaged 
and actively involved.
Since we set this target in FY20 and started 
measuring impact, we have already seen 
substantial improvements in the rate of 
supplier lost time injuries per worker. We 
analyzed 6.7 billion hours worked from the 
beginning of FY20 through the end of FY22 
and saw a 47% reduction in Lost Time Injury 
Rates (LTIR) during this time period. By FY22, 
all in-scope factories were implementing 
the program, and LTIR stabilized 
throughout the fiscal year.
Personal protective 
equipment is 
essential for Pham 
Thi Thuy Van’s 
work in a materialstesting lab at Feng 
Tay Vietnam.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
67 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
WORKPLACE 
FACILITATOR 
ON FIRE SAFETY
Fire prevention and action planning during 
emergency situations continue to be areas 
of focus. To improve fire safety practices 
among workers and managers, we 
implemented a facilitator program, which 
guides workers, managers and leaders 
on having peer-to-peer conversations on 
fire safety and other topics. This program 
started as a collaboration between the Fair 
Labor Association (FLA) and the Institution 
of Occupational Safety and Health (IOSH). 
Since 2015, over 96 Tier 1 finished goods 
suppliers have implemented the Workplace 
Safety Facilitator program and trained nearly 
375,000 workers on fire safety by the end 
of FY22.
IOSH COMPETENCY 
FRAMEWORK
A well-rounded Occupational Safety and 
Health (OSH) team has been identified as a 
key enabler to continually drive health and 
safety initiatives that result in reductions 
in incidents, non-compliances and overall 
negative impacts to the workforce. 
In FY22, we selected the IOSH competency 
framework as the tool to develop our 
internal NIKE Health and Safety team as 
well as suppliers’ teams. It is a standardized 
assessment process that gives the 
OSH professionals an opportunity to 
determine their current skill level with 
respect to technical, behavioral and 
core competencies. Then it gives them 
a personalized development track that 
focuses on enhancing either their technical 
knowledge, their business acumen or their 
interpersonal skills. 
In FY23, our NIKE internal teams will 
go through the framework. Then, we 
plan to scale the framework to strategic 
supplier facilities. 
People Health & Safety
A teammate checks 
fire safety equipment 
at Shenzhou’s 
Worldon apparel 
factory in Vietnam.
OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH AND 
HYGIENE
When new materials and manufacturing 
processes are introduced in our supply 
chain, it’s a priority for us to anticipate, 
recognize, evaluate and control potential 
workplace hazards that may arise and 
cause sickness or impaired health. NIKE 
developed an Industrial Hygiene Playbook
that guides in-scope suppliers on how to 
implement occupational health programs, 
policies and procedures to improve 
workplace conditions. 
Since the launch of the playbook at the 
end of FY22, 10 factory-based health and 
safety professionals have completed the 
Fundamentals of Industrial Hygiene training 
course offered by the Phylmar Academy
or an equivalent program. Additionally, 19 
have completed more advanced courses 
on industrial hygiene. We plan to continue 
to build out these courses in FY23.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
68 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
ROAD AND 
COMMUTER SAFETY
After beginning discussions in FY21 
with the ILO’s Vision Zero Fund (VZF), a 
G7-funded initiative focused on eliminating 
severe or fatal work-related accidents, 
injuries and diseases in global supply 
chains, we expanded our relationship and 
collaboration in FY22 to reduce road and 
commuter accidents among workers in our 
supply chain. 
VZF and NIKE developed of a Theory of 
Change (TOC) framework on road safety, 
using ILO-collected feedback from workers, 
employers, governments and ILO specialists 
from a number of countries. The framework 
identified the following four key outcomes for 
improving commuting safety for workers in 
the garment and footwear sectors:
1 Workers are empowered to make 
decisions and act to avoid and/
or mitigate known risk factors 
when commuting.
2 Workers have access to and use safe 
transport alternatives when commuting 
to and from work and are insured in 
case of accidents.
3 Road infrastructure adjustments 
are made and assistance services that 
mitigate road safety risks of commuters 
are available.
4 National legislation is aligned with 
international best practice and is 
effectively enforced.
We seek to continue our relationship with 
VZF in FY23 and will pilot the TOC road 
safety framework in a select country, 
focusing on the first two outcomes. The 
aim is to develop a scalable tool that can 
be deployed in other countries. 
People Health & Safety
MACHINE SAFETY 
CERTIFICATIONS 
Another health and safety priority is helping 
improve suppliers’ ability to operate and 
maintain modern and automated machinery. 
As part of our Code Leadership Standards
(CLS) suppliers are required to implement 
machine management programs and track 
their performance toward international 
machine safety standards. Working closely 
with Pilz, an internationally recognized safety 
expert, we provide advanced machine safety 
training and certification for suppliers. Since 
FY18, 253 machine safety practitioners 
have completed the Pilz training course, 
with 79 people designated as Certified 
Machinery Safety Experts, and have run 
safety checks on 63% of in-scope machines 
(over 49,000 machines), which include 
the following measures: 1) machine safety 
risk assessments, 2) job hazards analysis, 
3) risk-reduction controls, 4) safety work 
instructions and 5) training operators and 
maintenance staff on the work instructions.
Teams at Dong Jin 
Textile in Indonesia 
operate state-ofthe-art knitting 
machines.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
69 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Health & Safety
DEVELOP SAFETY 
LEADERSHIP 
AND GOVERNANCE
We believe effective leaders set the ethical 
tone for the company, hold themselves 
accountable for safety performance, drive 
safer behaviors at work and motivate their 
colleagues to do the same. 
With IOSH, we have successfully piloted 
an enterprise-level program with our 
largest supplier groups to help their 
company leaders evaluate and improve the 
effectiveness of existing safety governance 
structure and safety leadership. Seven 
supplier groups representing 72 factories 
and more than 445,000 workers have 
completed the program by the end of FY22. 
We plan to scale to the supplier groups in the 
Supplier Sustainability Council (SSC) in FY23 
and to the remaining in-scope supplier 
groups by 2025. 
The SSC is a group of suppliers’ 
enterprise-level representatives committed 
to innovating and scaling sustainability 
programs to enhance their operational 
performance and mitigate risk while sharing 
out best practices in the hopes of elevating 
worker safety across the sector. At the 
end of FY22, there were 11 suppliers in 
the SSC. The SSC workstreams, including 
transformational leadership in health and 
safety, come to life through the supplier 
group leadership. The program is aimed 
at enterprise-level leaders and governing 
bodies that are accountable for the strategic 
direction and oversight of health and safety 
in their organization. The program enables 
these leaders to gain confidence and better 
understand the key elements of effective 
corporate health and safety governance, 
their strategic strengths and areas where 
they can improve. 
SET AGGRESSIVE 
TARGETS AND REPORT 
PERFORMANCE 
We developed our Culture of Safety 
Maturity Assessment (CoSMA) in 2017 
to assist suppliers in measuring their 
progress. The tool, our maturity roadmap 
and assessment methodology are based 
on Professor Patrick Hudson’s research on 
Safety Cultural Maturity. When we piloted 
this initiative at eight different manufacturing 
facilities with over four million working hours, 
we found that supplier lines where the health 
and safety systems were piloted had 85% 
lower injury and illness rates compared 
to traditional manufacturing lines34.
The maturity roadmap, assessment 
methodology and CoSMA tool are offered to 
suppliers through a third-party online training 
platform hosted by the Phylmar Academy. 
In FY22, we added a companion guide, the 
Culture of Safety Playbook, to further assist 
34 https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=55877
facilities through their journey to develop 
mature safety cultures and systems. At the 
end of FY22, 292 factory personnel, thirdparty consultants and NIKE internal staff 
had completed the online training and were 
able to self-evaluate their health and safety 
culture maturity using standard methodology 
and metrics.
While working closely with third-party 
consultants, 46% of our in-scope suppliers 
(51 suppliers) have self-assessed their 
culture and have met our threshold for 
building safe and healthy workplaces, with 
mature management systems now covering 
more than 439,000 workers in our supply 
chain. This data has been validated by 
feedback from workers through a worker 
voice platform. We have implemented a 
new method to collect worker voice through 
MicroBenefits’ data platform and Safemap’s 
safety perception survey questions.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
70 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Our Purpose is to move the world forward 
through the power of sport and help 
create a level playing field for all. And we 
know that operating a responsible and 
resilient supply chain includes enabling 
access to career opportunities and upward 
mobility for women. In our manufacturing 
supply chain, women make up over 70% 
of the total workforce and 80% of the 
finished goods production workforce. 
Yet female representation decreases with 
the movement into leadership positions. 
We aspire toward a level playing field by 
focusing on creating career opportunities 
and upward mobility for women, because 
we know diverse organizations are more 
resilient, financially outperform their 
non-diverse peers,35,36 and more 
effectively attract and retain talent. 
100% of strategic suppliers are increasing 
access to career opportunities and upward 
mobility for women employed in their facilities
Quantitative Target
People Gender Equity
% of suppliers achieving 
mature gender 
equitable capability37
FY21 FY22
0% 2%
Target
100%
Our multi-pronged approach starts with 
engaging suppliers to help them build strong 
capabilities that we know enable cultures 
that promote and enable equity and will 
help result in an increase in representation 
of women in leadership and skilled roles. 
In order to achieve this goal, we continue 
to leverage partnerships with global 
gender experts, including long-standing 
relationships with the International Center 
for Research on Women (ICRW) and the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). 
35 https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/sustainable-inclusive-growth/chart-of-the-day/most-diverse-companies-now-more-likely-than-ever-to-outperform-financially
36 https://www.usaid.gov/engendering-industries/gender-equality-guides/business-case
37 This target baselined in FY21 as the tools to measure didn’t exist when the target period started. While none of the strategic suppliers reached a mature level 
of gender equity in FY21, more than 95% of suppliers met our FY21 milestone to deploy and validate the Gender Equity Diagnostic Tool, develop an action 
plan and implement actions.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
71 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
After setting this target, we worked with 
strategic suppliers to lay the foundation 
by helping build an understanding of the 
importance of gender equity, with the 
acknowledgment that every organization is 
starting from a different point on the gender 
equity journey.
In FY21, the first year of our five-year 
target, our in-scope suppliers deployed 
and validated the SDT assessment, which 
helped many of them to identify the stronger 
elements in their policies and practices, 
along with areas needing improvement. 
This tool helped suppliers think about gender 
equity as core to their business strategy and 
operations and not as a separate, standalone 
women’s empowerment program.
In FY22, suppliers completed the SDT for 
the second year. Overall, we saw an increase 
of 9% in their ratings on the tool globally. 
The SDT measured an increase in almost 
every domain, with the biggest gains in 
suppliers advancing internal metrics and 
key performance indicators to understand 
gender equity and in advancing policies 
and practices to support working parents. 
Over half of our in-scope factories began 
collecting data on unplanned absenteeism 
or turnover through a gender lens, allowing 
them to understand what factors help 
employees feel better supported. 
MEASUREMENT 
AND OUTCOMES 
To meet this target, suppliers must 
implement strong policies and practices that 
incorporate gender equity. We measure this 
target by validating supplier performance on 
the Gender Equity Self-Diagnostic Tool (SDT), 
which analyzes 10 domains of gender equity 
in areas from how organizations embed an 
equity lens into their recruitment and hiring 
practices to how they support and care for 
working parents in their workforce.
With the launch of our gender equity target in 
FY20, we worked in collaboration with ICRW 
to build the SDT to measure gender equity 
in the footwear and apparel manufacturing 
industry at the organizational level. After 
consulting with industry experts, as well 
as a representative group of suppliers, we 
were able to help ground the tool in real-life 
experience. With this input, ICRW was able to 
work with gender experts to bring this work 
to life. Anyone can access the tool on ICRW’s 
website, along with supporting materials to 
help those in the industry, including suppliers, 
build robust gender equity capabilities. 
People Gender Equity
With programs 
focused on 
movement and 
play, Feng Tay has 
provided childcare 
for thousands of 
working parents at 
factories in Vietnam 
since 2008.
SUPPORT FOR 
WORKING PARENTS
The need to support working parents has 
been amplified through the COVID-19 
pandemic and is becoming increasingly top 
of mind for all employers worldwide. Suppliers 
who now have a strong foundation and 
understanding of gender equitable practices 
were able to focus on understanding the 
root causes of areas of concern for working 
parents. These included childcare and 
balancing work and family responsibilities. 
As a result, suppliers have increased flexibility 
where they can, from adjusting transportation 
times to adapting childcare policies such as 
increased parental leave. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
72 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
To support this, we worked with IFC to share 
research and educate suppliers on the 
most effective policies to attract and retain 
working parents. This included case studies 
from three suppliers in which Pou Chen 
(Vietnam) saw increased productivity worth 
$470,000 each year, and TKG TAEKWANG 
(Vietnam) experienced reduced absenteeism 
which helped save $945,000 annually. 
MAS (Sri Lanka) launched a daycare center 
providing valuable support for working 
parents and saw sick leave absenteeism 
drop by 9%.
In FY22, the first of our supplier facilities 
were deemed to have gender equitable 
policies and practices, meeting the 
threshold for our 2025 target. These 
facilities showed a deep commitment to 
measuring and understanding their current 
state and displayed strong cross-functional 
prioritization of implementing key actions 
identified in the SDT. The impacts are 
already evident, with much stronger return 
rates post-holiday, where we often see high 
rates of attrition, and lower turnover and 
unplanned absenteeism rates compared to 
other factories. We are excited to continue 
these efforts and scale the learnings from 
our initial success in the coming years. 
CAPABILITY 
BUILDING
One of the ways we continue this progress 
and help suppliers advance gender equity is 
by offering capability building training. To this 
end, we worked with IFC to host a five-part 
training series with global suppliers – helping 
suppliers build foundational gender equity 
knowledge as well as providing targeted and 
actionable guidance on how to set meaningful 
and actionable representation targets. These 
sessions were attended by an average of 160 
participants representing facilities across 
all strategic suppliers. In early FY23, the 
remaining sessions will focus on genderinclusive recruitment and promotion, care 
and support for working parents and creating 
harassment-free environments, which are all 
key areas of interest requested by suppliers. 
IFC also offered direct bespoke support to 
interested suppliers. This included several 
facilities who will complete EDGE Gender 
Certification, a leading global assessment 
methodology and business certification 
standard for gender and intersectional equity. 
People Gender Equity
98
of in-scope suppliers set meaningful 
%
representation targets
Beyond NIKE’s supply chain, we also kicked 
off a collaboration, led by ICRW, with six 
other like-minded brands in the footwear and 
apparel industry and beyond, to co-create a 
gender-focused worker voice tool, which will 
be piloted in FY23. This tool is an industry 
first and is designed to complement our 
Engagement and Wellbeing (EWB) worker 
survey. It will allow us to more accurately 
triangulate with the SDT results to provide 
a full picture of gender equity in facilities. 
By working with other large brands, we are 
able to help drive change at scale across our 
industry and beyond, as well as learn and 
share best practices with our peers. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
73 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
REPRESENTATION 
We believe that organizations need to 
have strong equitable policies and practices 
in place to help advance more women 
into leadership roles and set women 
up for success. We also recognize that 
representation looks different for 
every organization. 
In FY22, IFC trained suppliers on how to 
set meaningful representation targets. 
From there, 98% of in-scope suppliers set 
meaningful representation targets after 
looking at their own business priorities 
and workforce demographics through a 
gender lens, and submitted personalized 
representation targets focused on increasing 
career opportunities and upward mobility for 
women employed in their facilities. 
The self-set targets fall into three focus areas: 
increasing the representation of women in 
initial levels of management, senior leadership 
and technical roles. Within technical roles, we 
have seen an uptick in interest of increasing 
the representation of female engineers 
specifically. We have seen suppliers set 
meaningful targets in areas that make 
sense for the shape of their business 
and the demographic contexts they are 
working within instead of deploying a 
one-size-fits-all approach. 
Supplier workforce data analysis indicates 
men advancing into the first rung of 
leadership at over three times the rate 
of women. In response, the Women’s 
Leadership Accelerator pilot program in 
Vietnam was implemented in partnership 
with IFC and local research organization 
Mekong Development Research Institute, 
with a focus on high-potential female 
employees in strategic suppliers’ facilities 
in Vietnam to strengthen women’s career 
advancement. This disparity at the initial 
entry to leadership roles exacerbates the 
underrepresentation of women in leadership 
at all levels. In order to help facilities close 
this gap, we are helping support female 
candidates for leadership roles through 
the Women’s Leadership Accelerator pilot 
program. This program, along with aligned 
factory self-set representation targets, has 
brought meaningful input for leadership. 
Three strategic suppliers, Huali, TKG 
TAEKWANG and Ramatex, joined us to 
serve as a supplier steering committee for 
the pilot program. Accelerator participants 
were nominated by their factory leadership 
to participate in the six-month pilot to learn 
both hard and soft skills, as well as to create 
a network with other women. The program 
kicked off in March with over 50 women 
representing 16 different supplier groups 
who collectively employ over 380,000 people 
in the country in facilities that supply NIKE 
product. The pilot concluded in September 
2022, and we are now measuring its impact 
and scaling in areas where it can provide the 
most benefit.
Tra Lam Thao 
(left) and Tran Vu 
Bich Hang (right) 
help lead a team of 
more than 10,000 
workers, 60% of 
whom are women, 
at Feng Tay’s Dona 
Pacific factory 
in Vietnam.
People Gender Equity
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
74 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Worker Engagement
Another key aspect of operating a 
responsible and resilient supply chain is 
investing in suppliers who engage and value 
their workforce. Higher engagement leads 
to a more efficient, agile and committed 
workforce, which results in beneficial 
outcomes for both workers and the 
organization. Not only are engaged workers 
more likely to feel physically and mentally 
secure – they are also more likely to actively 
and positively contribute to their work. 
100% of strategic suppliers are measuring 
and improving worker engagement
Quantitative Target
% strategic suppliers 
measuring and 
improving engagement38
FY21 FY22
0% 21%
2025 Target
100%
NIKE’s EWB program aims to drive 
employee engagement and well-being as 
a supplier-owned model to increase facility 
performance, including through key metrics 
such as higher productivity and decreased 
turnover. This program will help enable NIKE 
to work with suppliers that are committed 
to improving the lives of the people making 
our product.
We begin by measuring worker experience, 
then support suppliers in developing and 
embedding the capabilities needed to 
respond and improve these experiences.
38 Criteria for measuring and improving engagement must be met for the factory to count toward the target KPI of measuring and improving. While most 
suppliers have started to measure worker voice in their facilities, none have advanced to the next phase, which involves responding to and improving 
worker experience. The target baselined in FY21 and wasn’t measured in FY20.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
75 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
EWB SURVEY
NIKE developed the EWB Survey, a 
comprehensive and anonymous tool that 
helps capture the voice of workers across 
several experience categories. 
Once a supplier has deployed the EWB 
Survey, we have a suite of tools and supports, 
such as the EWB Action Planning Guide, 
to help suppliers develop and implement a 
process for converting survey insights from 
workers into action and embedding practices 
into their human resource management 
(HRM) systems.
In FY22, 89 of NIKE’s strategic suppliers 
deployed the EWB Survey, exceeding 
our expectation of 87 strategic suppliers. 
Since 2017, we have been scaling the EWB 
Survey to reach more suppliers. Since that 
scaling began, the EWB Survey has reached 
106 unique factories representing around 
580,000 workers across 15 countries.
Recognizing that no two suppliers are the 
same or at the same point in their employee 
engagement journeys, we work to meet them 
where they are and actively support building 
capabilities that increase engagement. 
Throughout the year, we monitor supplier 
target progress and conduct regular checkins to encourage continued commitment 
to the target and enable suppliers to share 
challenges. Based off these conversations, 
the NIKE team provides targeted support 
as needed. 
In FY22, 24 in-scope facilities measured 
and improved engagement. There is a 
natural journey in a supplier building their 
capabilities in measuring worker voice prior 
to being able to convert insights into action 
and embedding new practices in overall 
systems to drive sustained improvement. 
We continue to tap into survey insights 
to help prioritize and develop a more 
data-driven approach. For example, the 
top-scoring questions across geographies 
and demographic groups in FY22 were 
around social connection, getting input 
from employees and safety awareness. 
We also share common trends with suppliers 
and work to make sure these areas are 
prioritized. Suppliers can then begin to 
further understand the root causes of any 
issues and build capabilities to best address 
them as we progress toward 2025. 
Lilis Komala 
operates a cutting 
machine at a Chang 
Shin footwear 
facility in Indonesia, 
where workers now 
have access to HR 
systems and training 
via mobile app.
People Worker Engagement
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
76 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
INCREASING 
ENGAGEMENT
In FY22, we introduced the second phase 
of the target, providing a clear methodology 
for suppliers to implement the capabilities 
needed to improve engagement with their 
workforce in a consistent, scalable manner. 
Twenty-four in-scope facilities measured 
and improved engagement.
We seek to drive supplier-led measurement 
of worker voice. NIKE helps enable 
a standardized approach through 
our guidelines and best practices in 
implementing worker voice tools. We have 
developed for survey vendors an action 
planning guide to drive supplier ownership 
and accountability.
We continue to have strong relationships 
with organizations like MicroBenefits, 
Labor Solutions and Ulula, which provide 
not only the ability for facilities to digitally 
deploy the survey, but also a broader 
suite of services connecting workers and 
management. For many suppliers, their 
employee engagement strategy involves 
adopting solutions from these organizations, 
such as worker voice tools that are available 
on mobile devices and/or made available 
via tablets at convenient and private kiosks 
in the facility. These solutions have a 
variety of capabilities such as confidential, 
anonymized grievance mechanisms, training 
platforms and employee portals with access 
to things such as wage visibility and pay 
stubs, hours and benefits. As we look at 
the journey of progression, suppliers are 
increasingly identifying ways to leverage 
these types of digital solutions to increase 
their engagement with workers on a 
daily basis. 
Workers at Feng Tay 
Vietnam have access 
to sport facilities to 
promote engagement 
and wellbeing. 
People Worker Engagement
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
77 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Starting in 2015, we began working with 
strategic suppliers to develop compensation 
and benefit models as a part of their overall 
strategic HRM systems. These systems 
include integrated IT systems, benchmarking 
with the local labor market, aligning 
incentives and incorporating feedback from 
workers though worker voice platforms. 
Three of the 21 questions in our EWB Survey 
focus on workers’ experiences around pay. 
Through our EWB program, we support 
our suppliers on building capabilities and 
converting insights from our EWB Survey 
into actions. 
Aligning with the Fair Labor Association’s 
(FLA) definition of a fair wage, we expect 
suppliers to pay a wage that progressively 
meets workers’ basic needs, including 
some discretionary income. We share 
our standards and expectations with 
suppliers in our Code of Conduct and Code 
Leadership Standards (CLS). Strategic and 
fair compensation is a key priority for our 
responsible supply chain because it not only 
supports workers’ livelihoods, but to also 
help suppliers remain a competitive employer 
of choice in local labor markets by attracting, 
retaining and developing talent.
People Additional Priority Area: Supplier Compensation
Operator Yanti 
prepares fabric for 
cutting at a Pratama 
footwear facility 
in Indonesia.
Supplier Compensation
Additional Priority Area:
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
78 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
GETTING BETTER 
VISIBILITY INTO 
WAGES
We have continued to build better wage 
visibility year-over-year, and we continue 
to partner with the FLA in this effort. 
This is our third year of collecting robust 
and standardized wage data across 
a representative sample of our supply 
chain based on the FLA’s methodology 
and guidance. We collect this data 
alongside other key HR and workforce key 
performance indicators to allow us to have a 
complete and thorough picture. In addition, 
we compare this data to various benchmarks 
including minimum wages, national poverty 
lines and living wage benchmarks. It’s 
important to us that we have a credible, 
robust and accurate methodology for 
measuring wages.
Having credible third-party benchmarks is 
critical to understanding wage gaps. With 
this in mind, we have provided support 
to Anker Research Institute (ARI) as they 
develop their next living wage benchmark 
in Indonesia, which will be published 
later this year on the Global Living Wage 
Coalition (GLWC) website. ARI also has 
a thorough and detailed methodology, 
including extensive on-the-ground research 
that assess cost of living to determine an 
accurate benchmark. We plan to use GLWC 
in other regions where it is available. This 
effort will help us have approximately 80% 
of strategic suppliers in all regions compare 
their wages against an updated and more 
credible living wage as part of their overall 
benchmarking. We plan to supplement 
this data with other benchmarks where 
there are gaps or when more localized, 
accurate or up-to-date data is available from 
other sources.
People Supplier Compensation 
NIKE and Shenzhou 
teammates work 
together in a 
facility dedicated 
to manufacturing 
Flyknit, one of our 
most sustainable 
innovations.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
79 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
RESPONSIBLE 
PURCHASING 
PRACTICES
Another key element of our wage strategy 
is our responsible purchasing practices. 
We are not only driving compliance with 
the CLS with suppliers, but also looking 
internally at how our business practices 
impact those who make our product. 
We do this in several ways and continue 
to adapt as we learn more from suppliers 
and the industry to continue to steward 
and implement best practices. 
We have long-standing partnerships with 
most of the Tier 1 finished goods suppliers. 
Over 90% of NIKE footwear and apparel is 
made by factory groups that we have worked 
with for over 15 years. To enable suppliers to 
have time to plan and act responsibly with 
workforce decisions, we meet with suppliers 
on at least a quarterly basis to discuss 
current and future business forecasts. 
Working across our Sourcing, Costing, and 
Government and Public Affairs teams, we 
help give suppliers visibility into areas for 
improvement and collectively work together 
to address the root cause of issues.
Better Buying also continues to be an 
important partner for us and provides 
critical, anonymized input from suppliers 
on our purchasing practices. We have been 
participating in the Better Buying survey 
since 2018 and just received our most recent 
results back, in which we improved our 
total score since last year, increased our 
participation rate to above 50% and scored 
above the industry average overall. 
We regularly review our purchasing 
practices to make sure they both 
address marketplace demands and do not 
adversely impact compliance with our CLS. 
For example, during COVID-19 we paid in 
full for finished product from all suppliers 
globally, while honoring previously agreed 
payment terms for product in production. 
In the case of canceled orders, our policy 
with suppliers is, and has been, that NIKE 
will pay the appropriate amount of the order, 
depending on the stage of production as 
communicated by supplier, to enable the 
supplier to recover costs associated with 
the canceled order.
LOOKING AHEAD 
As we look to the future, we will continue to 
improve our data governance in collecting 
meaningful and actionable wage data and 
identifying ways to use this information in 
capability building and program focus. We 
will also continue to work with GLWC and 
others on expanding and updating robust 
wage benchmarks (including living wage, 
where available), and we will continue to use 
this information where available to identify 
gaps and build capabilities by evolving our 
programs and policies. 
Feng Tay teammate 
Pham Thi Thu 
Huyen on the Air 
Force 1 production 
line at a facility 
in Vietnam.
People Supplier Compensation 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
80 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
At NIKE, we believe a world-class 
responsible supply chain is grounded in 
standards that demonstrate respect for the 
environment, the people who make and 
move our product, and the principles of a 
healthy and safe workplace. With that in 
mind, we build long-term relationships with 
suppliers who share our commitment to 
making products more responsibly. 
We expect that all of the in-scope suppliers 
and third-party logistics providers we 
work with meet or exceed our foundational 
labor, health, safety and environmental 
expectations, which we share with 
them in our Code of Conduct and Code 
Leadership Standards (CLS).
100% of facilities in our extended supply chain 
meet NIKE’s foundational labor, health, safety 
and environmental standards, demonstrating 
respect for the rights of their workers and 
communities where they operate
Quantitative Target 
% Compliance w/ 
foundational expectations
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
% Measured of anticipated 
total scope
Target
100%
Target
100%
85% XX% 79% XX%
% compliance with 
Foundational Expectations
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
% measured of 
anticipated total scope
2025 Target
100%
2025 Target
100%
85% 60% 79% 97%
People Code of Conduct
When we set this target in FY20, 
we launched the most ambitious and 
accelerated expansion of our compliance 
program to date – updating our Code of 
Conduct and CLS in FY21 to continue 
to align with international standards, our 
strategic priorities and risk mitigation 
within our supply chain.
We also committed to transitioning from 
using proprietary tools to industry tools, 
enabling verified data sharing across 
the industry to increase transparency. 
This transition reduces repetitive audits, 
giving suppliers the opportunity to free 
up resources that they can, in turn, deploy 
toward programs that support workers 
and the environment. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
81 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
We assess Foundational Expectations 
through verified Social & Labor Convergence 
Program (SLCP) assessments, Higg 
Facility Environmental Module (Higg FEM) 
assessments and Zero Discharge of 
Hazardous Chemicals (ZDHC) wastewater 
testing. At the end of FY22, 97% of facilities 
have used at least one industry tool and the 
remaining facilities are currently scheduled 
to transition in FY23 based on industry 
tool availability. 
In FY21, we also expanded the scope of this 
target. We added additional Tier 2 material 
suppliers representing approximately 90% 
of total footwear upper materials and apparel 
textile production, in-scope distribution 
centers representing at least 80% of volume 
and our NIKE owned and operated Air MI 
facilities. We publicly disclose Tier 1 finished 
goods and Tier 2 material supplier facilities 
on the NIKE Manufacturing Map.
As a result of this expanded scope, we are 
seeing a dip in the compliance rate during this 
transition period. As expected, our finished 
goods and material suppliers who have been 
a part of our audit programs – some for more 
than 20 years – are adjusting to the switch 
of audit tool, assessment process and our 
elevated Code expectations. 
% compliance with 
Foundational Expectations
FY20 FY22
 FY20 target scope (T1 & 
high visibility39 T2)
94% 77%
FY25 target scope 
expansion (additional T2, 
DCs & Air MI)
NA 12%
Our material suppliers, Air MI facilities and 
distribution centers who are being assessed 
for Foundational Expectations for the first 
time are just starting on their journey. We 
anticipate that as facilities adapt to the 
new tools and processes, they will learn 
quickly as they take advantage of 
targeted remediation and capability 
building programs described in more 
detail below. We are already seeing some 
improvement as facilities complete their 
second assessments.
A forklift operator at 
a Far Eastern textile 
facility in Vietnam, 
which is now in 
scope as a Tier 2 
materials supplier 
for our foundational 
labor, health, safety, 
and environmental 
expectations target.
39 Suppliers manufacturing branded licensed products or branded 
footwear uppers and branded outsoles.
People Code of Conduct
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
82 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
97
of facilities have been measured 
%
(up from 79% in FY21 and 66% 
in FY20) 
DRIVING 
IMPROVEMENT
We are applying what we have learned 
over the last 50 years building long-term 
relationships with suppliers who share 
our commitment to making and moving 
products more responsibly. In FY22, we 
strengthened existing partnerships with 
third-party experts who help suppliers 
address the root causes of non-compliance 
though remediation and training programs. 
Our remediation strategy leverages a 
compliance management systems approach 
to diagnose problems, enable critical 
thinking and drive facility ownership. 
As a part of this strategy, we created 
three third-party remediation programs 
targeting the unique needs of suppliers. 
The remediation programs are geared 
toward building knowledge and capabilities 
while recognizing that suppliers have 
different levels of experience with these 
types of assessments. 
For Tier 1 finished goods suppliers’ who 
are not meeting Foundational Expectations 
on any industry tool, the program focuses 
on capability building to help address the 
issues impacting the supplier rating. Since 
these suppliers are used to being assessed 
for compliance, the overall goal is to confirm 
that all non-compliances are remediated in 
a sustained manner. This program provides 
an opportunity for suppliers to meet our 
Foundational Expectations in between 
industry assessments. By the end of FY22, 
37 facilities were enrolled in the program, 
and we expect them to successfully 
remediate findings in FY23. 
For Tier 2 material suppliers, who are likely 
less used to being assessed for compliance, 
we worked with a third party to develop a 
program to provide trainings and dedicated 
coaching to build the capabilities unique 
to their needs. The program is designed 
to help set the foundation of suppliers’ 
compliance management systems and 
enable issue remediation as the result. 
Many Tier 2 material suppliers have more 
than one non-compliance because they 
weren’t accustomed to these assessments, 
and we expect them to take more than a 
year to build the capabilities to remediate 
their non-compliances and meet our 
Foundational Expectations. Our remediation 
program includes both trainings and 
dedicated support to follow up on plans 
that aim to improve suppliers’ compliance 
management systems. We expect to see 
more Tier 2 suppliers successfully meet 
our Foundational Expectation as they 
continue to set their foundations and build 
compliance management systems. As of the 
end of FY22, 63 facilities were enrolled in this 
remediation program.
We also created a third-party-facilitated 
remediation program targeting the needs 
of distribution centers. In-scope distribution 
centers take part in a third-party-facilitated, 
interactive remediation program that guides 
them through the process of root cause 
analysis and the development of sustainable 
improvement plans for each finding. Through 
this four-month engagement, distribution 
centers demonstrated improvements on 
or addressed 80% of the findings.
We are also going beyond these tailored 
remediation programs to find opportunities 
to build capabilities across the supply chain 
that cover areas where we see trends in 
non-compliance. For example, in chemical 
management, where we continue to raise 
the bar on our requirements suppliers are 
encouraged to engage with the ZDHC 
Foundation Supplier to Zero program, 
which brings to life the ZDHC ethos and 
supports our industry tool approach.
People Code of Conduct
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
83 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index (SMSI) Factory Ratings
FY20 FY21 FY22
Gold World-leading manufacturing standards 
and innovation
0 0 0
Silver Industry-leading manufacturing standards 
and innovation
15 14 14
Bronze Baseline compliance with our Code of Conduct 432 424 370
Red Serious issues or failure to return to compliance; 
remediation plans in place to address or under 
review to exit
16 61 186
No Rating Enrollment in process 0 102 4
Zero Tolerance Critical issues demanding immediate action; 
remediation steps to address the issue or 
under review to exit
0 5 38
Target Performance
FY20 FY21 FY22 Change from FY20-22
All NIKE 94 85 60 -34 p.p.
Tier 1 94 92 79 -15 p.p. 
Tier 2 0 59 24 +24 p.p.
DC 0 0 0 N/A
Worker Count Results
Tier 1 Tier 2 DCs FY22 Total
# # # # %
Americas 59,722 3,998 13,747 77,467 6
EMEA 32,428 846 3,066 36,340 3
N Asia 113,272 61,449 3,985 178,706 14
S Asia 380,730 31,079 394 412,203 32
SE Asia 541,811 57,260 49 599,120 46
Total 1,127,963 154,632 21,241 1,303,836
Audit Counts
Tier 1 Tier 2 DCs FY22 Total
# # # # %
NIKE 61 1 0 62 4
SLCP40 286 158 26 470 33
SAC’s FEM40 379 185 0 564 40
ZDHC40 Wastewater Guidelines 82 166 0 248 17
DECA 0 0 20 20 1
FLA 4 0 0 4 0.3
Better Work 50 3 0 53 4
Total 862 513 46 1,421
40 Number of reports received.
People Code of Conduct
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
84 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
People Additional Priority Area: Foreign Migrant Workers
The employment of foreign migrant workers 
specifically creates an increased risk of 
forced labor. At NIKE, we believe in the 
Employer Pays Principle – prohibiting workers 
from paying fees for their employment – 
which is a critical component of a responsible 
supply chain and in eliminating forced labor 
risks in the industry and beyond.
NIKE’s approach to foreign migrant workers 
focuses on strengthening our standards and 
expectations, identifying risks, and working 
with global and local cross-industry, multistakeholder organizations.
Along with adopting the Employer Pays 
Principle, we are also a member of the 
Leadership Group for Responsible 
Recruitment (LGRR) – an initiative of the 
Institute for Human Rights and Business. 
We support them with their mission to 
drive positive change in the international 
recruitment industry by advocating that 
governments and organizations adopt the 
Employer Pays Principle. We also updated 
our Code of Conduct and CLS to help drive 
clarity on our expectations of suppliers and 
facilities and the types of prohibited fees.
Foreign Migrant Workers
Additional Priority Area:
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
85 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
In FY21, NIKE began a Strategic Partnership 
Program with Issara Institute with the kickoff of Issara Worker Voice program at all 
Tier 1 finished goods and Tier 2 material 
suppliers operating in Thailand that employ 
foreign migrant workers. This work focuses 
on empowering suppliers to strengthen 
human resources systems to address issues 
and build trust with workers while focusing 
on issues impacting foreign migrant workers. 
In FY22, 243 calls were received through 
Issara Worker Voice’s multilingual hotline 
channel. These calls focus on areas such 
as working conditions, employer–employee 
communications and relations, and labor 
recruitment. Issara works with the suppliers 
in sharing workers’ concerns anonymously, 
providing support and follow-up throughout 
each supplier’s improvement progress.
In FY22, NIKE expanded our partnership 
with Issara Institute by launching their 
Foreign Migrant Workers assessment 
survey in a factory in Thailand. This survey 
assesses gaps in the foreign migrant worker 
recruitment process, implementation of 
the Employer Pays Principle and working 
conditions. In FY23, we plan to expand the 
survey to other Thailand facilities employing 
foreign migrant workers.
Leaders discuss 
priorities during 
a shift change 
at a Chang Shin 
footwear facility 
in Indonesia.
We also work to provide robust resources for 
suppliers to identify risks in their operations 
and build capabilities to recruit workers more 
responsibly. This includes partnering with 
global and local experts to provide regional 
training to suppliers. 
In FY22, NIKE worked with the Responsible 
Labor Initiative (RLI) to deliver a responsible 
recruitment post-training program to all 
strategic material suppliers in Taiwan. 
This six-month program built on prior 
trainings with a series of practical coaching 
and consultation sessions between RLI 
experts and suppliers. In the program, the 
suppliers developed a gap analysis of their 
own recruitment systems and practices 
and prioritized key areas of improvement. 
All suppliers worked to strengthen their 
systems and practices in recruitment 
fees and recruitment agent due diligence. 
They were then divided into three smaller 
working groups based on their other 
areas of focus: responsible recruitment 
compliance monitoring, labor contract 
and job advertisement. These groups 
work directly with an RLI expert weekly 
in root cause identification, improvement 
plan development and implementation 
deployment. The suppliers also gather 
monthly for learnings and best practice 
sharing with their top management, and 
suppliers are coached to conduct selfevaluation of the improvements, so they 
have the capability to continue their 
improvement journey.
Since FY19, NIKE has used CUMULUS 
Forced Labor Screen™ – a due diligence 
tool to help identify risks related to the 
recruitment of foreign migrant workers. In 
FY22, we also expanded the use of the tool 
to all Tier 1 finished goods and strategic 
Tier 2 materials suppliers hiring foreign 
migrant workers in countries and regions 
in our extended supply chain that we have 
identified at heightened risk for forced labor 
– including Malaysia, Thailand, Taiwan, 
Japan, Jordan, Egypt, South Korea, Mexico, 
Argentina, and Brazil. In FY22, a new feature 
was added to the tool for verification of 
recruitment fee payment and reimbursement 
to the foreign migrant workers. This process 
helps us identify risks and opportunities, 
with focus on more impactful risks such as 
recruitment fees, to further support suppliers 
and their recruiting agents in implementing 
best practices. It also helps us continue to 
evaluate and monitor the effectiveness of 
the programs put in place to address and 
minimize risks related to forced labor.
Addressing complex and critical human 
rights risks, like forced labor, often requires 
industry collaboration, which is why we 
continue to work with multi-stakeholder 
and external organizations such as the 
FLA and the ILO’s Better Work program 
to address labor risks in our supply chain. 
Through these partnerships, we are able to 
address a wider range of human rights risks, 
including those related to forced labor. In 
FY22, we supported Better Work’s delivery 
of trainings to workers at several suppliers in 
Jordan, focused on topics like mental wellbeing, sexual harassment prevention and 
workplace communication.
People Foreign Migrant Workers
03 PLANET
90 Carbon
111 Waste
123 Water
127 Chemistry
86 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
87 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Climate change is impacting athletes* 
around the world. We see it in flooded 
football pitches and drought-parched 
fields, in the limited practice times 
of the young people we coach. 
We are radically reimagining our 
materials, production methods 
and processes. We know we must 
commit to innovating solutions that 
help protect the planet, and with 
it, the future of sport.
Planet Introduction
We believe that we, along with our 
industry, have a responsibility to 
reduce our impact on the planet. 
That’s why we’re reimagining how 
we make products through the lens 
of sustainability and circularity. 
We’re focused on using recycled 
materials, creating more durable 
materials, using better chemistry 
and making products that are easier 
to refurbish or recycle.
We take the same innovative 
approach to reducing impact 
across our entire value chain – 
from the way we manufacture and 
distribute products to the way we 
operate our offices, stores and 
distribution centers. Reducing 
impact isn’t enough though; we 
acknowledge the importance of 
creating positive impact through 
efforts such as water restoration.
Climate change takes collective 
action, so we’re working across 
our industry and beyond to lower 
our shared impact.
We are not waiting for solutions – 
we are helping to create them.
The longer I am a professional footballer, the clearer it becomes that 
sport has the power to open hearts and change minds. Even when 
I’ve chosen to sit out from international football to make a statement 
about gender disparity in football, I never saw it as time that I was giving 
up, but rather time I was investing for tomorrow. If we get equality right 
today, the future for women, girls and, frankly, everyone else is much 
better. That’s actually the reason I opted out of playing for the Norwegian 
national team in 2017, over the clear unequal treatment of the women’s 
team versus the men’s. Equality isn’t the only thing that will ensure a 
better future for sport. I’ve begun to advocate for our climate, too. When 
soaring temperatures force the cancelation of football matches, it’s 
youth teams who are left with nowhere to play. And extreme weather 
creates dangerous playing conditions that increase likelihood of injury. 
I think it’s pretty simple: If you love football... if you love sport, you 
need to care about our collective playing field - our planet. The more 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Ada Hegerberg
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
88 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Future Address
Planet Future Address
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
89 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
With hope, 
Ada
“I think it’s pretty simple… if you love 
sport, you need to care about our 
collective playing field – our planet.”
Together, we need to ensure that the future is 
one where sport accounts for all genders in 
an equitable, affirming and environmentally 
responsible way.
To keep us on a path toward a better future, I 
promise to keep having meaningful conversations 
and to push my sport to lead by example.
The longer I am a professional footballer, the 
clearer it becomes that sport has the power to 
open hearts and change minds.
Even when I’ve chosen to sit out from international 
football to make a statement about gender disparity 
in football, I never saw it as time that I was giving 
up, but rather time I was investing for tomorrow. 
If we get equality right today, the future for women, 
girls and, frankly, everyone else is much better. 
That’s actually the reason I opted out of playing for 
the Norwegian national team in 2017, over the clear 
unequal treatment of the women’s team versus 
the men’s.
Equality isn’t the only thing that will ensure a better 
future for sport. I’ve begun to advocate for our 
climate, too.
When soaring temperatures force the cancellation 
of football matches, it’s youth teams who are 
left with nowhere to play. And extreme weather 
creates dangerous playing conditions that increase 
likelihood of injury. I think it’s pretty simple: If you 
love football... if you love sport, you need to care 
about our collective playing field – our planet.
The more people and brands we have standing up, 
wanting to move all parts of athletics in the right 
direction, the more impact we can have, this is why
NIKE’s commitment to social and environmental 
equity is so important to me.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
90 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
Globally, our owned and operated facilities 
are an important part of managing our 
impact. While small compared to NIKE’s 
overall footprint including supply chain 
and materials, we have direct (through 
ownership) or indirect (through lease) control 
of energy use in over 1,000 facilities. In FY15, 
we set our RE100 commitment to reach 
100% renewable electricity by 2025 in NIKE 
corporate offices, distribution centers, Air MI 
and retail locations. This has been a primary 
contributor to the emission reductions we’ve 
seen thus far.
70% absolute reduction of GHG emissions 
in owned or operated facilities through 100% 
renewable electricity and fleet electrification
Quantitative Target
Owned or operated greenhouse 
gas emissions (metric tons CO2e) 
2020 Baseline
FY21 FY22
% renewable electricity
FY21
-42%
122,882
213,152
78%
FY22
-64%
75,768
93%
22
2025 Target
100%
2025 Target
-70%
We focus internal planning and resources 
toward supporting new renewable electricity 
project development. We continue to 
build our experience and expertise in the 
renewables space while supporting our 
supply chain and expanding into other 
forms of Scope 1 decarbonization.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
91 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
Since our initial assessment of our overall 
energy footprint, NIKE has worked to 
improve energy efficiency of our operations. 
NIKE seeks a variety of energy-saving 
opportunities, but prioritizes projects at 
locations with high electricity consumption 
and opportunities for energy efficiency 
upgrades. NIKE has sizable onsite renewable 
electricity projects at large-scale distribution 
centers in Belgium and China, with onsite 
solar in the U.S., Vietnam and Mexico.
Renewable electricity use drives the majority 
of reductions of this target. We have secured 
renewable electricity globally through 
power purchase agreements (PPAs), virtual 
power purchase agreements (VPPAs), 
onsite projects at six distribution centers, 
green power purchasing contracts, and 
by securing unbundled Energy Attribute 
Certificates (EACs) in select markets as a 
bridge solution.
Due to our renewable electricity 
procurement, Scope 2 market-based 
emissions have dropped significantly. At 
baseline, Scope 2 emissions comprised 75% 
of this target; in FY22 for the first time ever, 
Scope 1 emissions exceed Scope 2 (now 
33%). Office closures (due to COVID-19 and 
building construction) and energy-efficiency 
work also contributed to these reductions.
Natural gas use and related emissions 
increased in Air MI and distribution centers 
due to spikes in cold weather and increased 
ventilation due to COVID-19 operating 
requirements.
Solar panels being 
installed NIKE 
Mexico DC
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
92 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
NIKE Greater China 
Logistics Center
PROCURING 
RENEWABLE 
ELECTRICITY
We continue to monitor our energy and 
carbon growth trajectories alongside 
business planning to develop more 
accurate forecasts for our energy needs 
and understand emerging solutions while 
balancing cost, risk and additionality.
In 2016 we entered a direct power purchase 
agreement (DPPA) for the electricity we use 
at our WHQ in Oregon, which is powered 
from wind farms in the nearby Columbia 
River Gorge, and have further expanded 
similar initiatives. 
We have large-scale VPPAs at wind farms 
in Texas and Spain, which give us the 
renewable electricity for our consolidated 
loads in the U.S. and Canada, and 
across Europe. 
In Japan, NIKE distribution centers secured 
100% renewable electricity through green 
power purchasing contracts. In Greater 
China, we developed a project to expand 
renewable electricity coverage onsite with 
new wind turbines adding to the existing 
rooftop solar power at the Greater China 
Logistics Center for FY23. With estimated 
production of 14,000 MWh per year, the new 
wind project is expected to bring renewable 
electricity coverage at the facility to 100%.
We progressively adopt renewable electricity 
in locations where we have a large load 
and where marketplace solutions are 
available. In countries without feasible 
solutions, we pursue other options as bridge 
solutions while we continue to explore and 
advocate for better options for procuring 
renewable electricity. 
Where we have a small, dispersed footprint, 
NIKE began purchasing unbundled EACs. 
We sourced such certificates in 15 countries, 
making up 22% of our overall renewable 
electricity footprint. 
We also continue to collaborate with the 
U.S. Agency for International Development 
(USAID), U.S. Department of State, as well as 
other global brands to support the Vietnam 
government’s launch of a new renewable 
electricity program. Toward the end of 
FY22, NIKE became a founding member of 
the Asia Clean Energy Coalition (ACEC), a 
collaboration of renewable energy buyers, 
developers, and financiers to strategically 
shift policy in key Asian national and 
regional markets41.
Planet Carbon
41 https://asiacleanenergycoalition.com
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
93 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
REDUCING 
ENERGY USE
We deliver energy management and 
efficiency projects by type of building 
and part of the business. Some highlights 
in FY22 that drove reductions include: 
Distribution Centers
We completed an LED light retrofit project at 
the North American Logistics Center facility 
in FY22. 
Retail
NIKE piloted energy management systems 
that allow stores to see actual energy use 
in real time and adjust operations to reduce 
energy use. In FY23, NIKE expects to scale 
implementation with European stores in 
Italy, the U.K., Germany, Poland and France 
among the first stores globally to enroll.
In addition to operating systems and 
controls, NIKE is addressing energy use 
through design, build and retrofitting with 
more energy-efficient choices. These 
include heating and ventilation systems 
and LED lighting. 
NIKE has expanded its commitment to LEED 
standards for new and remodeled stores. 
To date, 31% of NIKE-owned retail stores 
are LEED certified.
Offices
FY22 was a transition year for our HQ 
facilities globally. We began the year 
with low on-campus attendance as our 
workforce continued working from home. 
Building-efficiency programs assured that 
facilities were operating at the lowest energy 
possible, while meeting the needs of those 
who continued or returned onsite. 
We conducted energy audits in FY22, with 
staff prepared to leverage efficiency findings 
as we welcomed athletes back to campus. 
While we observed upticks in carbon and 
waste compared to FY21, our impact metrics 
remain significantly below the FY20 baseline. 
Natural gas emissions at our HQ facilities 
increased 13% compared to FY21 but 
landed 24% below the FY20 baseline. 
Across buildings and offices at WHQ, early 
FY22 energy and emissions reductions 
can be credited to the Building Turn Down 
programs. We deployed strategic energy 
management programs, achieving energy 
reduction through regular data analysis 
and controls optimization. Together, these 
measures led to 15% energy cost savings 
from reductions in electricity and natural 
gas usage.
Air MI Facilities
Our facilities remained open through 
COVID-19, with enhanced operating 
procedures requiring increased ventilation. 
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning 
systems (HVAC) increased energy use as 
they pulled in additional external air. 
Corporate Jets
NIKE’s fleet management program for 
aviation is pursuing the National Business 
Aviation Association’s Sustainable Flight 
Department Accreditation to achieve 
sustainability practices across our 
operations. The home-base sustainable 
aviation fuel (SAF) program is well 
established and NIKE aims to begin 
purchasing fuel from the SAF program 
monthly in FY23.
Fleet
We have made strides in fleet electrification, 
addressing the greatest concentration of 
fleet vehicles and planning for new solutions 
where fewer vehicles are needed. In EMEA, 
we’re transitioning 300 fleet vehicles to 
electric at distribution centers. At our WHQ 
campus in Oregon, we launched the process 
to develop a dedicated EV-charging lot with 
50 ports to serve our fleet vehicles, which 
will help us transition to a fully electric fleet. 
This builds on our existing 135 on-campus 
EV-charging locations for our fleet, and more 
than 1,500 registered employee users.
of NIKE-owned retail stores 
31%
are LEED certified
Senior Director, Material Innovation
Beaverton, Oregon, USA
SPEND A DAY WITH:
 NAMRATA AMIN
“Because we’re working on future product innovations, 
we rely on data to guide us – and our intuition. If 
something shows promise, then we start testing and 
iterating. In that sense, both data and emotion are crucial 
to how we approach new technologies.”
Planet Coaching Diaries
94 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Nurturing and growing
After we meet on future innovation, there’s 
important work to be done tending to our ongoing 
projects. NIKE Forward was my team’s biggest 
launch in 2022. Our aim was to reduce our carbon 
and water footprint by completely rethinking the 
way we make textiles. We took an existing tool in 
the textile industry (needlepunch machines) and 
applied it to sportswear with a brand new 
approach to assembling fibers and creating 
apparel textiles. That game-changing non-woven 
textile was 5 years in the making because at every 
stage we had to make sure we were applying 
principles of sustainability, and that we weren’t 
cutting corners when it came to water or carbon.
Creating a nourishing environment
Creating a cohesive culture is key to successful 
innovation. Most afternoons, I’ll meet one-on-one 
with my team to check in on their progress and 
discuss challenges. But I’ve learned that good 
leadership is more organic than scheduled 
meetings. It’s the way I greet people in the 
morning or ask questions in a meeting. For me, 
showing up and supporting my team is being 
excited to meet people where they are.
Thinking time
At the end of every week, every Friday afternoon, 
I carve out time for reflection: How did we work as 
a team? Was there a moment someone felt they 
didn’t belong that I could have done something 
differently as a leader? It’s a dialogue with myself. 
I build a bank of observations, make notes and 
look back over longer periods. That shows me 
patterns and tells me a story of what’s going on. 
I also do a lot of reflection with other people, 
whether it’s with my life coach or my NIKE mentor. 
As you grow in leadership, it can get lonely in a 
strange way. My coach and mentor are guides I 
can bounce ideas around. My mentor brings so 
much experience to our conversations. They’ve 
had some of the experiences I’m having now, so 
they are able to ask me questions that will help 
me grow as a leader. That kind of empathy is very 
nurturing: it’s helping me to become a better 
version of myself, for me and for my team.
Working across the planet
Because I work with manufacturers all over the 
world, I spend a lot of time traveling. Most months 
I’ll be on another continent. I might be visiting our 
team of innovators based in Greater China, who 
work with our partners overseas to bring ideas 
and concepts to life. In fact, I just got back from 
Sri Lanka, where I worked with our factory 
partners to align strategy for our next cycle.
It can be hard to cut off completely during the 
week. I’m immersed in this experience of material 
iteration: being with experimenters and innovators, 
that’s my happy place. But on weekends, I switch 
off completely – no phone calls, no emails, 
nothing. To relax, I like sketching, it brings me 
peace. And Bollywood movies, bad ones as
much as the classics.
“My job is to find and nurture ideas,” Namrata 
Amin explains, “it’s finding the seeds, nurturing 
them, making them into little saplings and then 
planting them into the industry as trees.” She 
knows growth requires two things: a positive 
environment and consistent care. As Senior 
Director, Material Innovation, Namrata puts this 
ethos into practice as the leader of a team of 
apparel innovators at NIKE World Headquarters 
in Oregon.
Namrata started her career working with heritage 
handloom textiles in India. At the heart of her 
passion for textiles was a deep respect for our 
world, for what she calls “the higher level of 
creative unity of our planet.” Namrata’s role at 
NIKE connects to this ethos, as she is charged 
with innovating new and next-generation 
materials solutions in four areas of impact for 
NIKE: carbon, waste, water and chemistry.
Namrata is inspired by the belief that 
sustainability needs to evolve from a 
purely technical space to an emotional 
and behavioural one. At NIKE, Namrata has 
witnessed the impact of aligning values with 
action. When we “feel in our bodies that this 
is our planet to nurture, together,” she tells us, 
“that’s when we’re empowered to act for our 
collective future.”
Planet Coaching Diaries Planting seeds
Some of the most exciting mornings start with 
innovation meetings. This is when the whole team 
gets together to share new ideas. Everyone’s 
invited because the next great innovation could 
come from anyone on the team. At every meeting, 
we remind each other that there will always be 
more failures than successes in our role. So much 
of my work is about building relationships and 
trust, listening to new ideas and giving feedback. 
Our challenge is to find those rare innovations that 
are really going to make athletes’ lives better. 
My team works on environmentally preferred 
materials. We’re seeing a huge surge in demand 
for more responsible apparel, and that’s exciting 
because there’s a lot we can do. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
95 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
96 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
2020 Baseline
Planet Carbon
Greenhouse gas emissions from key 
suppliers’ manufacturing and transportation 
operations will be at or below 2020 levels 
through use of renewable energy, energy 
efficiency and alternative fuels 
Quantitative Target
Reducing emissions from manufacturing 
and transportation is critical for NIKE to 
meet its 2030 Scope 3 science-based 
emission reduction target and its longer-term 
2050 target. It’s also critical to our visions 
of a responsible and resilient extended 
supply chain, which accounts for over 
90% of the company’s greenhouse gas 
footprint – with finished goods and materials 
manufacturing accounting for over 30% and 
logistics roughly 10%. Under business-asusual scenarios, absolute emissions are 
anticipated to rise; therefore, we must push 
beyond incremental reductions and unlock 
transformative solutions in the supply chain. 
Manufacturing & transportation greenhouse 
gas emissions (metric tons CO2e)
FY21 FY22
-22%
2,864,812
-15%
3,086,965
 “In order to achieve our goals in this 
space, we have to accelerate the use 
of alternative fuels. I’m filled with 
optimism, humility and gratitude 
that the work I am doing directly 
drives change to create the best 
possible tomorrow.”
Samantha Callas
Responsibility Director, 
APLA Operations and 
Logistics
People Profile
3,650,162
2025 Target
0%
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
97 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
At NIKE, we have a long history of working 
toward shared sustainability targets across 
our supply chain. Our programs help drive 
operational efficiencies and energy savings 
among our owned and operated facilities, 
as well as with suppliers and transportation 
providers. This helps us build operational 
resilience across the value chain for a 
future where climate impacts will become 
more apparent. 
Across the supply chain, our strategies 
are focused on the areas that offer the 
greatest near-term opportunities to 
reduce emissions. Our strategies include 
building engagement models and supplier 
capacity programs that enhance supplier 
ambition, action and resiliency over the long 
term. To amplify our impact, we are also 
leveraging industry groups across shared 
supply chains. 
Our manufacturing emissions-reduction 
strategy with suppliers is built on the 
following pillars: 
1 Energy efficiency 
2 Onsite solar photovoltaics (PV) 
at factory sites 
3 Procurement of offsite 
renewable electricity 
4 Thermal decarbonization in dyeing 
and finishing facilities 
5 Engagement and capability building
6 Climate risk assessment 
ENERGY 
EFFICIENCY
One of the foundations of NIKE’s 
efficiency work with suppliers is the NIKE 
Energy Minimum Program, which brings 
organizational capabilities, data analytics 
and energy management activities to 
contract manufacturers. Additionally, 
NIKE works with suppliers to scale key 
opportunities that are likely to have the 
greatest impact on their unique energy 
and carbon footprint. 
We are also working to create better 
methods to track the energy and emissions 
impact of specific activities in the value 
chain, which will empower NIKE to make 
better data-driven decisions for a future 
lower-carbon product supply chain. 
A Shenzhou 
facility in Vietnam 
has replaced a 
centralized coalfired boiler system 
with electric boilers, 
greatly reducing 
GHG emissions.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
98 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
ONSITE RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
Costs of onsite solar installations have 
fallen to the point where they are often less 
expensive than grid-purchased electricity, 
thus offering financial savings for suppliers 
while also reducing their carbon footprint. 
Onsite solar PV can typically cover up 
to 15% of electricity requirements at 
supplier facilities and can be scaled 
fairly quickly across sites, thus making 
it a major component of our renewable 
energy strategy with suppliers. 
Since 2019, NIKE has offered an onsite 
solar PV consulting program to suppliers 
in key markets – including China, Vietnam 
and Indonesia. Through the program, 
NIKE has provided suppliers with technical 
advice and assistance, helping to reduce 
risk for suppliers during the contracting 
process and make the business case for 
these investments. During FY22, suppliers 
signed contracts for 96 MW of new onsite 
solar. Since NIKE started the program, 190 
MW of rooftop solar has been contracted 
at 64 facilities in NIKE’s supply chain. Due 
to the onsite solar PV program, NIKE’s 
manufacturing base avoided 16,400 MT of 
CO2e in FY22. Rooftop solar projects, which 
are concentrated in Vietnam, Greater China 
and Thailand, have helped suppliers grow 
their rooftop solar capacity42 by 184% from 
FY20 to FY21 and 69% from FY21 to FY22.
Policy barriers have slowed the pace of 
adoption of renewable energy in FY22 
in countries that don’t have regulatory 
frameworks in place. NIKE is working with 
energy regulators to advocate for better 
policies that support additional onsite solar 
installations. We will expand our work with 
onsite solar programs in new geographies 
in FY23.
In 2022, 
manufacturing 
supplier Shenzhou 
significantly grew 
their rooftop solar 
capacity in Vietnam.
Planet Carbon
42 Rooftop solar capacity increases based on signed contracts between 
suppliers and solar developers.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
99 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
OFFSITE 
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
While suppliers are making significant 
emissions reductions through deployment 
of onsite solar PV, facilitating access to 
offsite renewable electricity will offer even 
greater opportunities for suppliers to reduce 
their emissions footprints. In FY22, NIKE 
began developing a Renewable Electricity 
Procurement Guide for suppliers to support 
their transition to cleaner electricity. NIKE is 
also working with a cross-industry group of 
multinationals to support capability building 
for suppliers across Asia. Additionally, NIKE is 
exploring policy frameworks to support offsite 
procurement across our sourcing regions and 
encouraging suppliers to take advantage of 
those opportunities where they exist. 
In FY22, through collaboration with the 
Clean Energy Investment Accelerator (CEIA), 
NIKE helped facilitate a bundled Renewable 
Energy Certificate (REC) agreement 
between Indonesia’s state-owned electricity 
company and local suppliers. The program 
enables suppliers to purchase a verified and 
traceable source of renewable electricity 
at a fixed, competitive price for 10–15 
years. NIKE anticipates that a marketbased solution, such as a corporate power 
purchase agreement mechanism, could 
take years to develop in this market. The 
bundled REC program offers a good interim 
solution since buyers will be purchasing 
local energy, helping to encourage additional 
local development of renewable energy. This 
initiative will significantly reduce factories’ 
carbon emissions from their electricity 
consumption. We anticipate supplier 
participation will result in over 55% reduction 
in carbon footprint from electricity in 
Indonesia and 10% across the manufacturing 
source base. The impact could grow as 
factories in Indonesia increase their volume of 
electricity purchased in the program. 
In most of our major markets, NIKE suppliers 
do not have the ability to procure cleaner 
electricity through mechanisms that are 
considered most beneficial in terms of 
pricing, complexity and impact – such as 
direct power purchase agreements. We are 
continuing to advocate for government policy 
frameworks supporting offsite procurement 
mechanisms in these major markets. 
Along with a dozen other multinational 
companies, NIKE supported the launch of 
the Asia Clean Energy Coalition (ACEC) in 
FY22. The coalition seeks to align the world’s 
leading cleaner energy buyers, project 
developers and financiers to help policymakers, utilities and energy regulators 
innovate and deploy cost effective cleaner 
technologies across the Asia-Pacific region. 
Through the ACEC, NIKE representatives sat 
down with Indonesia’s national utility at the 
B20 in Bali in November 2022 to share our 
priorities on corporate renewable electricity 
procurement in Indonesia.
Planet Carbon
In Vietnam, NIKE has collaborated with 
the USAID’s Vietnam Low Emission Energy 
Program (V-LEEP) to advocate for policy 
supporting the government’s renewable 
energy DPPA pilot since 2018. Although 
the launch of the DPPA pilot continues to 
be delayed, NIKE has actively engaged 
with the Vietnamese government to show 
multinational business support for the 
finalization of the program and continues 
to push for that engagement through 
the ACEC and other platforms. 
NIKE also supports the U.S. State 
Department’s Clean Energy Demand 
Initiative (CEDI), which encourages countries 
and companies to work together to advance 
shared clean energy goals by leveraging 
corporate clean energy commitments. 
NIKE signed letters of intent to procure 
renewable electricity in key sourcing 
countries and has engaged with CEDI 
leaders to highlight policy issues we would 
like to see raised with government officials. 
NIKE has also shown leadership in policy 
engagement though USAID’s Corporate 
Clean Energy Alliance, a coalition of 
businesses working with governments 
across Southeast Asia to facilitate the 
rapid deployment of cleaner energy. 
Through a growing suite of renewable 
electricity solutions, NIKE hopes to continue 
accelerating supplier emissions reductions 
toward meeting long-term climate targets.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
100 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
COAL ELIMINATION
Prior to 2020, NIKE ran a program to 
eliminate and optimize centralized steam 
boiler systems across finished goods 
manufacturing. Coal-fired steam boilers 
typically were replaced with a more efficient 
electric heating process, contributing to a 
10% reduction in energy consumption per 
pair of footwear manufactured between 
2015 and 2020. By the end of FY21, all 
in-scope supplier coal use was eliminated 
across footwear and apparel finished 
goods manufacturing.
Through the UN Fashion Charter, NIKE 
and participating brands have a goal to 
eliminate coal from finished goods and 
material suppliers by 2030. In materials 
manufacturing, the transition from coal to 
other sources of energy is more challenging 
given the higher heat requirements in that 
segment of the supply chain. To encourage 
more sustainable fuel use in thermal 
processing of materials, NIKE joined seven 
other brands in our industry with the Apparel 
Impact Institute to explore options for coal 
elimination across the industry. Through 
this initiative, NIKE co-chaired a working 
group that developed coal phase-out plans 
for 48 boilers at 17 facilities across Vietnam 
– including five supplier facilities. Beyond 
Vietnam, nearly all suppliers have plans in 
place to meet this target.
NIKE continues to seek options to pilot 
new thermal technologies through our 
engagement in the Renewable Thermal 
Collaborative. Additionally, NIKE’s Innovation 
teams are considering a whole suite of 
cross-cutting technology solutions that 
may deliver long-term emissions reductions 
in materials manufacturing. 
SUPPLIER 
ENGAGEMENT 
CLIMATE CAPABILITY 
BUILDING 
At the beginning of every five-year target 
period, NIKE works with manufacturing 
suppliers to set both five-year and annual 
targets to help achieve longer-term goals. 
NIKE field teams regularly analyze supplier 
emission performance data and help suppliers 
meet their 2025 targets by identifying 
locations that are not keeping pace with their 
commitments. As suppliers’ own climate 
programs have matured, their respective 
targets have evolved from energy intensity to 
carbon intensity, and many prioritize absolute 
carbon emissions reductions in alignment with 
NIKE’s 2030 Science-Based Target. 
The NIKE Supplier Climate Action Program 
(SCAP) is a critical component of supplier 
engagement work, supporting ambitious 
climate action for new layers of the supply 
chain. Eleven manufacturing suppliers 
belonging to the Supplier Sustainability 
Council (SSC) in FY22 accounted for up 
to 65% of strategic supplier emissions. 
These suppliers have set Scope 1 and 
Scope 2 science-aligned targets for 2030. 
In collaboration with the SSC, NIKE will 
create a joint climate action plan to serve 
as a roadmap for collective emissionsreduction pathway over the next 10 years. 
SSC members helped to pilot this program, 
which is expected to be rolled out to all 
strategic manufacturing suppliers.
Suppliers often face difficulty obtaining 
financing to invest in decarbonization 
solutions. NIKE is working with the 
International Finance Corporation’s 
(IFC) Global Trade Supplier Finance 
(GTSF) program, to provide competitive 
financing rates to eligible suppliers 
based on their performance against 
our Foundational Expectations. 
Planet Carbon
At a Far Eastern 
textile facility in 
Vietnam, biomass 
is replacing coal 
in steam boiler 
systems. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
101 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
CLIMATE RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
NIKE is working to enhance its supply 
chain climate resilience by integrating 
considerations for climate risk into enterprise 
sourcing and planning. This includes 
considering risks to water scarcity, clean 
energy supply, grid stability and rising 
temperatures.
NIKE plans to assess key climate risks to 
the workforce in its extended supply chain 
over the next 10-15 years. We’ll assess the 
impact of climate risks on individual workers’ 
health and productivity, as well as how those 
risks impact our operations. This research 
will consider the disparities in exposure, 
and the sensitivity and adaptive capacity 
of workers based on location, gender, and 
other demographic factors – with gender 
as a crucial dimension to our assessment.
TRANSPORTATION
Our transportation work focuses around 
a three-pronged strategy that includes: 
1 Minimization use of air freight use; 
2 Implementation of alternative fuels 
for ocean, air and road freight; and
3 Engagement with our logistics service 
providers and industry groups
Air Freight 
In FY22, we continued to see low inbound air 
freight usage (from manufacturing facilities 
to destination distribution centers). While 
there was a small increase in inbound air 
freight usage from FY21 to FY22, air freight 
was still well below our pre-pandemic 
levels. We continued to help ensure internal 
controls and best practices are in place. 
NIKE aims to keep inbound air freight usage 
low for future years. 
In North America, we reduced our 
digital outbound air freight usage (from 
distribution centers to digital consumers) 
by 10 percentage points year-over-year. 
We achieved this through cross-functional 
initiatives like fulfillment optimization, 
expansion of our regional service centers, 
the implementation of our “No Rush” 
sustainable shipping option and the 
discontinuation of our free two-day shipping 
upgrade program. Together, these initiatives 
resulted in a 23% reduction of CO2e/unit for 
purchases made through nike.com in North 
America in FY22. 
Alternative Transportation Fuels 
NIKE is working closely with our logistics 
transportation providers to expand the 
use of electric vehicles as well as lowercarbon fuels in ocean, air, and road freight. 
In FY22, approximately 6% of our inbound 
ocean shipments benefited from the use 
of sustainably-certified biofuels, reducing 
our inbound transportation emissions by 
approximately 15,000 MT CO2e. We engaged 
in ocean transportation biofuel pilots in FY22 
and laid the foundation with an aim to scale 
up our ocean biofuel program in FY23. 
In EMEA, we continued expanding the use 
of hydro-treated vegetable oil – a biofuel 
derived from vegetable oil oils in outbound 
logistics (from distribution centers to final 
destinations). Hydro-treated vegetable 
oil can deliver an 85-90% carbon savings 
compared to traditional fossil fuels and can 
be used in conventional diesel engines. 
In FY22, 100% of our outbound linehaul 
deliveries to the Netherlands, Norway, and 
Sweden were on trucks using hydro-treated 
vegetable oil. 
While electric heavy-duty trucks are still 
a relatively new innovation in long-haul 
trucking, they are an important next step 
in reducing transportation emissions. 
In FY22, NIKE started piloting the use of 
electric heavy-duty trucks for long distance 
outbound deliveries in Belgium, helping 
to reduce carbon emissions by more 
than 45% compared to conventional 
fuel heavy-duty trucks.
Transportation Industry Decarbonization
To engage our logistics service providers 
on decarbonization solutions in FY22, 
NIKE continued to be active in the industry 
groups Clean Cargo and the Sustainable Air 
Freight Alliance. Both groups are businessto-business leadership initiatives involving 
major brands, inbound air and ocean 
carriers, and freight forwarders dedicated 
to promoting responsible shipping practices. 
Additionally, NIKE continued driving positive 
change in the logistics industry with our 
Supply Chain Sustainability Index (SCSI), 
an evaluative framework that sets clear and 
consistent sustainability expectations for 
NIKE logistics service providers. FY22 was 
the sixth consecutive year that our inbound 
air and ocean providers have participated 
in the SCSI process. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
102 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
0.5M metric tons of GHG emissions 
reduced through increasing our use 
of environmentally preferred materials 
to 50% of all key materials43
Quantitative Target
Planet Carbon
By focusing on improving the environmental 
impact of materials within our products, 
we have the opportunity to implement 
sustainable innovations throughout our 
products and work toward our emissionsreduction target at scale. 
Most of our efforts are placed on replacing 
materials with the largest impact. For 
footwear, we continue to focus on improving 
specific, high-volume materials (polyester, 
rubber and leather), through significant 
efforts to increase the use of recycled 
versions of these materials and developing 
the necessary business strategies to support 
their use at scale. 
Additionally, we have continued to evolve 
how we think about our roadmap for 
new foams. Examples include bio-based 
replacements of traditional fossil-based 
foams, as well as new foams that utilize 
less energy-intensive methods of make. 
Innovation will be increasingly important, 
focusing on circular and new recycling 
methods and material types that meet our 
product and consumer requirements. NIKE 
is well ahead of our recycled polyester plan 
in both footwear and apparel. We have made 
significant progress toward our leather target 
since last year’s report but are still tracking 
behind our goal for rubber. 
Materials greenhouse gas emissions 
reduced (tonnes CO2e)
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
% Environmentally preferred 
materials (EPM)
.123M .183M 32% 39%
2025 Target
50%
2025 Target
0.5M
43 Key materials – polyester, cotton, leather and rubber. 2020 Baseline 2020 Baseline
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
103 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
Polyester, cotton and a blend of the two are 
responsible for most of the material used by 
NIKE Apparel – and its carbon footprint. Our 
focus is to drive impact at scale in reducing 
our carbon footprint and selecting better 
materials. We are concentrating our efforts 
on material conversions to recycled polyester 
and recycled and organic cotton on our 
largest-volume materials and products, which 
requires cross-functional collaboration from 
Innovation and Supply Chain to Marketing 
and our consumers at retail. 
Two years into our five-year journey to 2025, 
our focus on key materials with scalable 
options that can drive impact at scale has 
enabled NIKE to make tremendous progress 
toward our carbon-reduction targets. 
NIKE is ahead of its recycled polyester plan 
in apparel and continues to see excellent 
momentum through the teams to convert 
more materials and products. Apparel is on 
track for its organic cotton plan, but slightly 
behind in recycled cotton. NIKE continues 
to explore plans to increase recycled cotton 
usage and close this gap in future years.
POLYESTER
Polyester, found in nearly every pair of 
NIKE footwear, is a core material due to its 
performance and durability. Because polyester 
is such a versatile and widely used material in 
NIKE footwear, it is also the primary option to 
focus on transitioning to recycled polyester 
at scale, as it can be replaced with little to 
no compromise to material performance, 
aesthetic and hand feel.
In FY22, we saw a 10 percentage points 
increase for recycled polyester in apparel 
compared to 38% in FY21. NIKE continues 
to convert global sports kits that are 
showcased on the biggest stages around 
the world in federation kits for Global 
Football, including the kits for the Women’s 
European Championship, and WNBA and 
NBA basketball uniforms. We are also driving 
tremendous scale with the conversion of 
most of our apparel icons the Legend Tee 
and Club Fleece to recycled polyester.
At the end of FY22, recycled polyester 
made up 46% of NIKE Footwear’s total 
polyester usage, up from 28% the previous 
year. Progress was driven by our focus on 
foundational polyester-based materials 
that cut across our product portfolio, such 
as laces, linings and reinforcements. In 
addition, we have prioritized converting 
textiles and yarns to recycled polyester 
used in our business volume drivers (such 
as the Better Essentials collection and 
the Downshifter 12) and iconic silhouettes 
(such as Air Max).
While we have made great progress in our 
journey toward recycled polyester, we still 
have more work to accomplish and have 
plans in place to continue to convert our 
top materials and products.
Our Innovation teams are researching 
closed-loop alternatives like feedstock 
or chemically recycled polyester44, as well 
as bio-based versions to further improve 
NIKE’s polyester footprint and work toward 
a circular future. 
Dong Jin Textile 
in Indonesia knits 
fabric for footwear 
from recycled 
polyester.
44 Chemical recycling (feedstock recycling) refers to operations that aim to chemically degrade the collected plastics waste into its monomers or other basic chemicals. 
The output may be reused for polymerisation into new plastics for the production of other chemicals or as an alternative fuel.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
104 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
COTTON
Cotton remains an important material for 
NIKE Apparel. Demand for cotton continues 
to grow due to our focus on sport lifestyle 
products and increased interest for both 
t-shirts and fleece. Our organic cotton 
usage is supported mainly through a 
10% blending program across most of our 
cotton materials. This usage and strategy 
places NIKE among the top users of 
organic cotton globally. 
FY22 was the beginning of our crossfunctional recycled cotton strategy to 
establish priorities and build roadmaps and 
plans. We now have a strategic plan for 
conversions of major materials and products 
that will consist of blends of recycled cotton 
that should reach the consumer in the 
near future. 
We are supplementing our cotton portfolio 
of organic and recycled cotton with thirdparty-certified cotton. We are planning even 
more adoption and capabilities in FY24 and 
beyond as we increase our recycled cotton 
usage and our closed-loop recycling rates, 
as well as reducing waste at Tier 1 suppliers. 
RUBBER
Rubber is the key outsole traction 
material used across NIKE footwear; 
as such, our goal is to reduce how much 
rubber we use. We aim to move to highrecycled-percentage formulations that 
maintain material benefits while lowering 
environmental impact. In parallel, we’re 
innovating ways to reduce the amount of 
rubber used through additive design and 
manufacturing while also exploring other 
materials and methods to replicate the 
performance of rubber at a lower impact. 
NIKE Footwear aims to achieve our 2025 
goal of 10% recycled rubber but broad 
use in lifestyle models has been limited. 
Progress to date has been driven by using 
recycled rubber formulations primarily on 
Running and Global Football models and 
Kids Performance products. In the future, 
we want to standardize those formulations 
across footwear including high-volume 
lifestyle products. We are working across 
our Innovation and Manufacturing teams and 
rubber compound suppliers to unlock highrecycled-content rubber options that meet 
our design and durability expectations.
Regrind material in NIKE Footwear
FY22 
Tiered Models
% of Nike Grind 
material in 
outsole
Revolution 6 NN 10%
Downshifter 12 13%
Star Runner GS 8.1%
Crater Impact 14%
Air Max 2021 13%
NIKE
Crater Impact
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
105 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Carbon
CONVERSE 
GRIND
Converse is tracking toward 10% recycled 
rubber across all footwear by 2025. 
Converse has introduced several key 
programs in FY22 using its Grind process 
that depending on footwear style and rubber 
color is able to incorporate approximately 
22%–40% reclaimed/reused rubber 
scraps from the manufacturing process 
back into select outsoles. Converse aims 
to incorporate the Grind process across 
additional product lines, while continuing to 
explore new processes that would allow for 
higher contents of non-virgin rubber45. 
LEATHER
Leather is one of the highest-impact 
materials for both carbon emissions and 
waste across the footwear and apparel 
industry. On the other hand, it also provides 
value in product durability and longevity. 
Due to the consumer preference for classic 
NIKE leather icons such as the triplewhite Air Force 1, Air Jordan 1, Blazer and 
Court Vision, leather models continued 
to outpace the growth of the rest of NIKE 
Footwear. To meet consumer demand while 
reaching our 2025 target we want to use 
the lowest-impact materials available from 
the best-in-class suppliers. 
Our plan for 2025 is to decarbonize our 
Top Five Materials46 in Product by Volume47
FY20 FY21 FY22
metric 
tons %
metric 
tons %
metric 
tons %
Polyester Recycled 44,387 23% 55,477 33% 82,317 46%
Total Polyester Use 195,490 166,343 180,645 
Cotton Organic 10,811 10% 13,680 12% 17,748 12%
Recycled 503 0.4% 905 0.8% 867 0.6%
Third-Party Certified 85,139 75% 66,776 58% 94,417 66%
Total Cotton Use 113,615 115,543 142,113
Rubber Recycled 564 0.7% 689 0.9% 2,045 2%
Total Rubber Use 76,141 78,896 94,494 
Ethylene-Vinyl 
Acetate (EVA) 
Foam
Recycled 978 2% 907 2% 2648 0.1%
Total EVA Foam Use 61,053 53,055 44,523 
Leather49 Flyleather 53 0.1% 57 0.1% 13 0.02%
Synthetic Leather 18,623 36% 16,031 26% 18,117 28%
Total Leather Use 51,646 60,502 65,870
portfolio of leather materials by shifting 
our sourcing toward those materials that 
are measurably lower impact (for carbon 
emission and waste) than average. In FY22, 
we have partnered with key suppliers to 
measure their impacts across the full value 
chain, from farm to factory, to inform our 
sourcing and identify opportunities for 
additional impact reduction across the 
supply chain. We continue to explore other 
alternatives for leather from non-animal 
sources and scale the use of synthetic 
and recycled synthetic leather in our key 
essentials. We are also maintaining our 
standards, and require 100% of our leather 
suppliers to be members in good standing 
with Leather Working Group.
46 Total material use rows reflect both EPM totals and conventional materials totals. Only EPMs are called out in table. As we have shifted data sources to enable more inclusive scope of measurement in our 2025 
targets, our percentage has dropped. We continue to explore ways to help grow our sustainable cotton percentage in alignment with the expanded measurement scope. Cotton and polyester data includes NIKE 
Brand footwear, apparel and socks, and Converse footwear and apparel. Rubber, EVA foam and leather data includes NIKE Brand footwear only.
47 Total material use reflects EPM and conventional materials. As we have shifted data sources to enable more inclusive scope of measurement in our 2025 targets, our percentage has dropped. We continue to explore 
ways to help grow our organic, recycled and third-party certified cotton percentage in alignment with the expanded measurement scope. Cotton and polyester data includes NIKE Brand footwear, apparel and 
socks, and Converse footwear and apparel. Rubber, EVA foam and leather data includes NIKE Brand footwear only.
48 Recycled EVA foam dropped due to methodological shifts in underlying data, combined with key suppliers of recycled EVA being offline several months due to COVID.
49 All leather is Leather Working Group certified.
45 Non-virgin rubber is defined as rubber scrap from Converse factories or scrap from the NIKE supply chain.
001 NIKE FY22 Impact Report
Global Leadership Development Program, 
Beaverton, Oregon, USA
SPEND A DAY WITH:
 THUY VU
“We talk about the obstacles we’ve overcome and how we build 
strength from these experiences. Failure is such a scary word, 
but I think it’s essential to growth. The beauty of the Global 
Leadership Development Program is that we’re given space to 
learn from each other. If one of us solves a problem, we all benefit 
and can share that knowledge with our wider teams.”
Planet Coaching Diaries
106 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Mastering a global workday
Communication between North America and 
Asia is essential to my role. I might start early for 
a breakfast meeting with my Global Leadership 
Development Program (GLDP) cohort here in 
Beaverton, but also have a late call to speak with 
one of our teammates in Asia. Because of the time 
difference, I need to be able to work flexibly: it’s 
not your typical 9 to 5. 
One of the ways I break up my day is with sport. 
I always start the day with yoga, to begin with a 
really fresh mind. If I can, I’ll run in the afternoon. 
For me, it’s as much about mental as physical 
health. If I’m struggling with an idea, I can take 
that with me on my run, refresh it and address it 
in a different way. 
Getting started with 
strategic thinking
A large part of what I do is strategy. In practice, 
that means lots of different things. Sometimes, 
I have a very specific problem to solve – like 
identifying external speakers who can bring 
inspiration and learnings to NIKE and our 
suppliers in the Supplier Sustainability Council 
(SSC). Other times, it’s much broader in scope, 
such as the 2030 Vision for the SSC. 
I always start by listening. In this rotation, I’ve 
been investigating ways to scale impact across 
the supply chain by working with suppliers and 
industry associations. For example, I start by 
asking: What opportunities are there for us to 
accelerate this work? What programs are we 
currently implementing with suppliers? How can 
we collaborate pre-competitively with the industry 
to amplify impact? I will carry these questions 
through the rest of my day, whether I’m in a 
meeting with NIKE teammates or on my run. 
Building trust
When I begin a new six-month rotation, the most 
important thing is building trust and understanding 
the team I’m working with. To be a good leader, 
you have to be committed to learning all the time. 
One person I’ve learned a lot from is Marine 
Graham, Vice President of Responsible Supply 
Chain. She was in the very first cohort of the 
GLDP, so her journey is a powerful example for 
me. It’s one of those full-circle moments that I’m 
on her team now.
From Vietnam to the States
More than 50% of NIKE’s footwear manufacturing 
and 30% of apparel manufacturing takes place in 
Vietnam. One of my key responsibilities is to bring 
knowledge from working in the country to our 
global team. I can help the team see how policies 
actually come to life in-country within facilities and 
with our suppliers. 
The GLDP is based on this idea. Each highperforming, high-potential cohort spends two 
years doing four six-month rotations across 
NIKE’s supply chain teams. Participants bring 
their diverse experience to each rotation. And, 
we learn from each other: from how to adjust 
our leadership style to different cultures to how 
to drive action and inspire NIKE teams all over 
the world. 
. 
Sending it back
My time at NIKE World Headquarters has 
provided me with new ways to drive impact. 
NIKE has supported my ambition to create ties 
between Oregon and Vietnam by approving my 
board position on the Oregon-Vietnam Economic, 
Education and Cultural Association (OVEECA). 
The organization, which I co-founded, focuses 
on leveraging education, cultural and language 
exchange, and investing in young leaders. 
A perfect evening
My perfect evening is spent with my kids. We 
share what we did during the day, and just enjoy 
being together. Because of the time difference, 
after work is a good time to call family and friends 
in Vietnam. If I call my best friend in Ho Chi Minh 
City before I go to bed, that’s lunchtime for her. 
Time away from the office is so important. Even 
if I work late during the week, my weekends are 
a time for rest and spending time with loved ones. 
When you prioritize rest, you have the capacity to 
be there for others. My resolution this year was to 
think about all the positive things I can do for 
other people to make them smile and laugh.
Planet Coaching Diaries
Thuy Vu is a connector by nature. “When we talk 
about supply chain,” she says, “we’re talking 
about people.” Thuy has been driving impact for 
NIKE for more than 16 years – starting in Vietnam. 
Originally from Hanoi, for Thuy this work is 
personal. A majority of NIKE’s manufacturing 
footprint is in Vietnam. Whether she’s working on 
programs that help get kids active or advancing 
policy engagement to expand renewable energy, 
she’s driving impact for her community. 
Thuy was invited to relocate to NIKE World 
Headquarters in 2020 and later joined a supply 
chain leadership development program. Now 
in her third rotation of four, she is focused on 
creating the 2030 vision for NIKE’s Supplier 
Sustainability Council, which advances programs 
around climate action and gender equity beyond 
NIKE’s footprint. 
“NIKE’s extended supply chain, with over 
1.2 million workers, is made up of mostly women. 
When we talk about our vision for the future 
of sustainability with suppliers, we’re talking 
about women.”
Thuy makes sure the team has one foot in 
the future with the other firmly grounded in 
community – because this work isn’t about 
supply chain; it’s about people. 
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
107 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
108 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet FY30 Science-Based Targets
FY30 SCIENCEBASED TARGETS 
(SBTs)
We have been working to reduce carbon 
emissions stemming from our business 
for decades, and in FY17 we committed to 
setting long-term carbon targets aligned 
with the emerging consensus on climate 
science. In line with the SBT initiative’s 
commitment criteria, we used FY15 as 
our baseline, calibrating the start of our 
15-year SBT tracking period with the Paris 
Agreement50 as well as with our shorterterm five-year Purpose targets. We finalized 
defining our SBT reduction goal in FY19, 
at which time we galvanized coordination 
company-wide to start systemic changes 
across NIKE to advance our progress toward 
this ambitious goal.
Much bigger than any of NIKE’s historical 
carbon targets in duration, scope and 
ambition, our SBTs represent the first full 
carbon footprint targets we have set as a 
company. Stretching from FY15 to FY30, 
they significantly exceed our standard fiveyear Purpose target cadence. Extending 
deeper into our supply chain than ever 
before, our SBTs address much more 
than our own operations under our direct 
influence, and goes beyond the parts of 
our supply chain we’ve targeted in the past; 
it requires nothing less than extensive, 
disruptive innovation. Similar to our FY25 
carbon targets, our SBTs are absolute rather 
than relative, per-unit targets.
Together, these factors render our carbon 
targets more difficult to achieve the more 
our business grows. While our FY25 targets 
are designed to support our progress 
toward our SBTs, achieving our FY25 targets 
doesn’t guarantee successfully achieving 
our FY30 SBTs. This highlights the criticality 
of deepening our work beyond the areas 
covered by our FY25 targets in order to 
accomplish our SBTs.
PERFORMANCE
Scope 1 and 2
We have met our Scope 1 and 2 SBT 
several years early. However, we know that 
maintaining these emissions reductions 
requires ongoing effort, and thus are actively 
focused on ensuring these reductions persist.
Our Scope 1 emissions continue to grow 
versus our FY15 baseline (+43%) and yearover-year (+9%) due to our expanding owned 
and operated facility portfolio combined 
with the limited availability of scalable, lowercarbon alternatives to replace natural gas 
and other carbon-intensive fuels. FY22 
brought momentum through procurement of 
sustainable aviation fuel via a regular supply 
to our home aviation base, and we continue 
to explore sources of renewable natural gas, 
leveraging our internal sustainable fuels policy 
to enable consistency in decision-making.
At 93% renewable electricity adoption 
(+79 percentage points compared to our 
FY15 baseline) via onsite solar and wind, 
power purchase agreements and unbundled 
Renewable Energy Credits, we’ve seen an 
89% decrease in Scope 2 emissions against 
our baseline (and a 67% decrease versus 
FY21). We continue to explore options to 
expand our renewable electricity portfolio to 
reach our goal of 100% renewable electricity 
by FY25.
Scope 3
As a growth company, decoupling our total 
emissions footprint from unit growth remains 
a critical challenge to address as we strive to 
reach our absolute carbon targets. Another 
obstacle stems from the fact that given long 
product timelines, the products currently 
in market reflect decisions made several 
years ago, which creates a lag in realizing 
the carbon reductions due to strategies and 
investments made since the announcement 
of our SBT.
While we continue to see an increase in 
emissions against the FY15 baseline, this 
growth has slowed, as seen in our year-overyear reduction, indicating the impact of our 
long-term decarbonization efforts.
Scope 1 and 2
FY22 vs. FY15 
Baseline FY22 vs. FY21 Target
-71% -38% -65%
Scope 3
FY22 vs. FY15 
Baseline FY22 vs. FY21 Target
+8% -8% -30%
50 The Paris Agreement’s central aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well 
below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. (Source)
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
109 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet FY30 Science-Based Targets
Scope 3 Performance vs. Baseline
Growth in our product offering (i.e., units) 
remains a primary driver in our emissions 
rising against the baseline, along with the 
continued popularity of higher-carbonintensity materials in footwear (such 
as leather). Additionally, the soaring 
emissions intensity of the electricity grid in 
manufacturing regions (particularly Vietnam) 
against the baseline has contributed to 
growth in our emissions footprint.
In contrast to these factors, renewable 
energy adoption across our finished goods 
manufacturers and materials dyeing and 
finishing suppliers, and within some raw 
material source countries, has helped 
mitigate emissions in our supply chain. 
We’ve realized further reductions in apparel 
materials emissions due to increased 
efficiency and proactive management of 
manufacturing activities across our materials 
dyeing and finishing suppliers. This has 
resulted in the ability to leverage direct 
measurements of energy consumption 
in textile manufacturing operations (e.g., 
knitting, weaving, leather tanning and nonwoven manufacturing) rather than solely 
relying on estimated data using general 
lifecycle assessment (LCA) emission factors. 
Additionally, we’ve seen emissions from 
logistics continue to drop as inbound air 
freight remains at near-historic lows for 
our company.
Scope 3 Performance vs. Last Year
Along with these improvements in materials 
manufacturing driving year-over-year 
reductions, further advancements in 
materials used in product and packaging 
have also made an impact. Within raw 
materials, we have augmented our 
emissions factors (derived from LCAs) to 
better reflect the reality of our material 
supply chain. Some of our associated 
material emissions decreased due to 
operational and business improvements 
(e.g., among our primary leather suppliers), 
and some of our materials emissions have 
changed due to methodology revisions 
associated with more accurate materials 
process mapping (see Appendix for more 
information). Within packaging, material 
emissions-intensity reductions due to 
improvements in packaging-material 
emissions methodologies and more 
accurate packaging-material mapping led 
to a drop in overall packaging emissions.
LOOKING AHEAD
To achieve our ambitious emissionsreduction goal, we will focus on increasing 
use of EPMs, helping factories convert 
to use of more renewable energy and 
working across industries to accelerate 
decarbonization of fuels, packaging and 
other components of the value chain 
necessary to produce, move and sell 
NIKE products.
Teammates at a Far 
Eastern facility in 
Vietnam load a dye 
machine with fabric 
made from recycled 
polyester.
SBT Footprint FY15-22 (Metric Tons CO2e)
Scope 1 Scope 2 Scope 3
35,264 | 228,770 | 9,219,282
37,325 | 225,853 | 9,433,177
40,138 | 224,511 | 9,947,164
41,941 | 210,321 | 10,269,811
46,713 | 105,390 | 10,737,016
52,312 | 160,840 | 11,604,118
46,462 | 76,420 | 10,827,234
50,868 | 24,900 | 9,953,491
9,483,676
9,696,355
10,211,813
10,522,073
10,992,794
11,817,270
10,950,116
10,029,259
Total
FY22
FY20
FY18
FY21
FY19
FY17
FY16
FY15
110 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Planet FY30 Science-Based Targets
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
111 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
10% waste reduction per unit in 
manufacturing, distribution, headquarters 
and packaging through improved design 
and operational efficiency
Quantitative Target
Planet Waste
Reducing waste reduces carbon emissions, 
the consumption of natural resources, the 
strain on ecosystems and the full range 
of impacts associated with making and 
disposing of manufactured materials 
and products. Preventing waste typically 
provides at least twice the carbon reduction 
and economic benefit of recycling. At our 
size, scale and growth, reducing waste per 
unit will be essential to mitigate the total 
impact of our products. 
Waste/unit (grams/unit)
2025 Target
-10%
 “I am proud of our work to reduce our 
carbon emissions and hungry to do 
more – I want everyone to feel like they 
are part of our journey. It is amazing 
to feel that at NIKE, we also influence 
and inspire our partners and those 
around us to do better, which makes the 
impact of our work go far beyond our 
own efforts.”
Sofie Rollier
Sustainability Manager, 
EMEA Logistics
People Profile
FY21 FY22
-6%
274.58
-8%
269.40
2020 Baseline
292.38
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
112 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
optimizing the size, shape and layout of 
parts that are cut out of upper materials. 
This includes maximizing the use of leather 
hides, sheets of textile, synthetic leather and 
other materials. We also support suppliers’ 
efforts to reduce midsole and outsole 
(bottom) defects, rubber waste and carton 
waste, which comprise more than 75% of the 
waste that suppliers can control or influence. 
To reduce defects and rubber waste, we 
improved our lean 2.0 manufacturing 
systems and are scaling systems to track 
the sources and root causes of these waste 
types. In FY22, we scaled our bottom defect 
tracking system to factories responsible for 
50% of bottom component defect waste. 
This reduced the midsole defect rate at 
targeted factories by 45% and prevented 
approximately 2.5 million kilograms of waste. 
We also started to track rubber flashing 
waste by model at 28 targeted factories 
that drive 80% of this waste stream, and are 
strategically focusing root cause analysis 
on the models that drive this waste stream 
the most.
To reduce carton waste, we are replacing 
single-use cardboard cartons with 
reusable boxes where possible. In FY22, 
we continued to scale our reusable carton 
initiative to 12 more suppliers and 34 
finished goods factories in three countries, 
preventing an additional 500,000 kilograms 
of waste per year.
Within apparel, we consider the material 
efficiency of our designs early on in 
our product creation and development 
process, which reduces waste throughout 
the manufacturing process. This can be 
achieved through adjustments to patterns to 
optimize fabric yields, using lighter-weight 
materials where possible and increasing 
our reliance on inherently less wasteful 
methods of make, such as Flyknit. We are 
also working to reduce packaging both 
on and around our products, as well as 
in transportation. 
In our FY21 report, we shared the challenges 
we had in using available data to estimate 
product waste. In FY22, significant progress 
has been made on both data quality and 
accessibility, which helps us implement 
baseline standards and reporting in the 
product creation process to build more 
efficient designs. We hope to share our 
results with suppliers in FY23. 
Planet Waste
NIKE has a holistic strategy for achieving 
this target that focuses on the major drivers 
of waste. At its core, this strategy includes 
using less material and maximizing materials 
we use through manufacturing efficiencies 
and improvements, and reusing whatever 
we can. We do this by using lighter materials, 
increasing pattern efficiencies in our 
material cuts and using lean 2.0 principles 
for continual improvement. 
We measure and report on waste across 
our full value chain – from product creation 
to manufacturing facilities and distribution 
centers. We then set goals for reducing 
it and implement plans to achieve those 
goals in partnership with thousands of 
teammates across the world who are 
working tirelessly to contribute toward these 
waste-reduction targets.
MANUFACTURING 
WASTE
Eighty-two percent of finished goods 
manufacturing waste is from footwear. About 
60% of that is from creating the upper part 
of shoes and 40% from making the midsole 
and outsole. Most of the materials used in 
footwear manufacturing use petroleum or 
leather, both of which are environmentally 
intensive to produce. We work with suppliers 
to minimize upper materials scrap by 
With suppliers like 
Feng Tay, we are 
tracking root causes 
to prevent and 
reduce rubber waste.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
113 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
DISTRIBUTION 
CENTERS
NIKE’s business growth and reach to 
consumers across the globe requires 
that we move our product throughout our 
supply chain with care for the product and 
the expectations of our consumer related 
to cost, convenience, service, quality, and 
sustainability. As a result, we constantly 
challenge ourselves on our waste steams 
to first reduce and then, once optimized, 
recycle. At over 90%, corrugated cardboard 
used for product packaging continues to be 
the primary waste driver at our distribution 
centers. While corrugate is a recyclable 
waste, its volume grows with our business. 
Reducing and reusing packaging where 
possible before recycling it enables us 
to reduce the extraction of finite natural 
resources and the carbon and cost 
associated with new corrugate production.
The key process to reducing corrugate waste 
in our distribution centers is addressing 
the master outer cartons (MOCs) used to 
ship products from manufacturing facilities 
to distribution centers. When stores order 
quantities that differ from the factory supplier 
case sizes, for example, distribution centers 
unpack inbound corrugated cardboard 
cartons and repack them in new cartons 
– that process creates more waste. About 
45% of the outer cartons must be disposed 
and recycled to repack manufacturing 
cartons into smaller quantities for 
our customers. 
In FY22, we cut the weight of footwear 
MOCs by 24%, for over 30% of our footwear 
MOC portfolio, and removed 770,000 
kilograms of corrugate weight shipped 
from factory suppliers. We plan to continue 
scaling this effort in FY23 targeting apparel 
and accessory MOCs in addition to 
footwear MOCs.
HEADQUARTERS 
In FY22, NIKE completed a comprehensive 
waste audit of its WHQ in Oregon. We 
developed a targeted waste roadmap that 
will inform actions needed to achieve our 
waste reduction targets. We identified 
key levers, such as promoting employee 
behaviors and procurement guidelines. Then 
we acted on them, by enhancing centralized 
waste stations and introducing durable 
express containers in to-go dining areas 
to reduce disposable containers.
With the return to workplace at our 
headquarters (HQs) around the world, 
we were challenged to reintroduce and 
strengthen sustainable behaviors. We 
determined that the most effective way to 
achieve our waste goals was to produce and 
procure less waste. Key strategies to reduce 
waste at our HQs include: 
1 Fostering a culture of “right-sizing” – 
purchasing only what is required and 
refraining from ordering catering or 
product in excess
2 Promoting durable over disposable 
products and materials – for example, 
incorporating reusable hot and cold 
cups and silverware in kitchen and 
dining areas 
Planet Waste
Serena Williams 
Building NIKE 
WHQ
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
114 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
 “I am happy to see we can change 
the way people look at waste together 
and influence their behavior by 
showing them how we turn waste 
into valuable material.”
Tina Wu
Partner Responsibility 
Manager, GC
People Profile
% of waste diverted from
 landfill and incineration51
FY21 FY22 FY21 FY22
% of waste recycled51
2025 Target
100%
2025 Target
80%
97% 97% 70% 72%
100% of waste diverted from landfill in 
our extended supply chain with at least 
80% recycled back into NIKE products 
and other goods 
Quantitative Target
Planet Waste
As NIKE’s business grows, it’s critical 
that we decouple this growth from a 
dependence on constrained natural 
resources by keeping materials circulating 
at their highest value. Our diversion and 
recycling targets represent our goal to 
operate a responsible supply chain and 
circular systems that maximize material 
reuse and recycling while minimizing value 
loss and diverting waste more responsibly 
in the communities where we work and 
make our products. 
Our strategy for reaching this goal is 
focused on minimizing waste generation, 
increasing reuse and recycling, and 
recovering energy from waste that can’t be 
prevented, reused or recycled at this time. 
51 Diverted waste: Includes waste to energy incineration, recycled waste, and composted waste. Recycled waste: Includes recycled and composted waste.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
115 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
MANUFACTURING
In FY22, we achieved 100% diversion of 
waste to landfill in apparel and continued 
100% diversion in footwear for the second 
year. Recycling rates increased to 54% in 
footwear and to 87% in apparel in FY22, 
helping us move one step closer to our 
ambition for full circularity.
Some materials are harder to recycle than 
others, with few scaled recycling options for 
mixed materials. Through our Foundation 
for Excellence Program with suppliers, we 
can help them segregate, handle and store 
their scrap materials according to our high 
standards to maximize their marketability. 
We have seen local markets emerge and 
evolve in response to the constant availability 
of these high-quality, sorted materials – 
particularly in the countries where most 
of our manufacturing scrap is generated.
We are also actively working with suppliers, 
along with third parties, to identify promising 
recycling innovations and operators for our 
highest-volume and highest-impact materials 
for the future. Globally, we face a critical lack 
of scaled, in-market recycling technologies 
and quality operators located near our 
manufacturing locations that can process 
the full range of waste materials our product 
supply chain generates into usable feedstock 
for new products. We know that creating a 
circular future for NIKE and the industry is 
going to require innovation and collaboration. 
Year over year, we recycled 21% more 
kilograms of total manufacturing waste, which 
helped to drive up the overall manufacturing 
waste recycling rate by five percentage 
points despite increased waste generation in 
manufacturing. 
CLOSED-LOOP 
RECYCLING52
Closed-loop recycling is our highest 
aspiration and the goal we are continually 
working toward. By increasing closed-loop 
recycling we can maximize the recycling of 
our waste back into footwear and apparel or 
similar products.
Apparel
Textile-to-textile recycling takes pressure off 
virgin material supply chains for cotton and 
polyester. In the near term, NIKE intends to 
focus on cotton and polyester supply chains 
to reduce our dependence on higher-impact 
versions of important fabrics.
Part of our strategy focuses on increasing 
NIKE’s use of recycled cotton by increasing 
the amount of cotton manufacturing scrap 
that Tier 3 recyclers (yarn suppliers) and Tier 
2 fabric suppliers source from Tier 1 finished 
goods factories. From there, Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 suppliers recycle the manufacturing 
scrap into materials they supply back 
to Tier 1 factories to make new finished 
products. NIKE hopes these efforts will 
result in increases in closed-loop apparel 
fabric recycling from late FY23 and build 
into FY24 and FY25.
We are also targeting polyester fabric waste 
in key locations where feedstock or chemical 
recycling technologies44 are available and 
encouraging scaling of these technologies 
in other areas where polyester product 
manufacturing is predominant. 
In the years to come, additional solutions 
for blended textile materials, which are 
more challenging to recycle than materials 
made entirely from cotton or polyester, must 
be found. We are working to identify and 
scale promising technologies in our key 
manufacturing geographies as part of 
our long-term strategy. 
Footwear
Our strategy for closing the loop on footwear 
materials is two-pronged, with a near-term 
focus on reincorporating higher volumes 
of more readily recyclable materials while 
seeking innovations for more challenging 
materials. Our immediate focus is on closedloop recycling of rubber and EVA foam 
scraps, which make up over 22% of our 
footwear waste. 
Planet Waste
High quality, 
sorted materials 
help maximize 
the marketability 
of manufacturing 
scrap at facilities 
like Chang Shin’s 
in Indonesia.
52 Closed-loop recycling refers to NIKE manufacturing or other waste material that is included in the manufacturing of NIKE finished goods.
44 Chemical recycling (feedstock recycling) refers to operations that aim to chemically degrade the collected plastics waste into its monomers or other basic chemicals. 
The output may be reused for polymerisation into new plastics for the production of other chemicals or as an alternative fuel.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
116 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
For example, we are working to find more 
efficient ways to color sort rubber waste to 
overcome the aesthetic challenges of using 
mixed recycled rubber. We are also focusing 
on expanding the usage of recycled EVA 
midsoles with standardized formulations 
that are available in all manufacturing 
countries. Some materials like leather and 
mixed materials provide more challenges 
when it comes to closed-loop recycling, 
but we are continually exploring and testing 
new innovations. We are also working 
with vendors to explore closed-loop 
polyester waste as a potential replacement 
for polyester from ground up plastic 
beverage containers.
In FY22, we increased recycled rubber usage 
across footwear to 2.2%. We also increased 
the creation of higher recycled content 
midsole foams by implementing incremental 
changes through chemical engineering.
OPEN-LOOP 
RECYCLING53
When we face limitations on what can be 
reused in our own products, we drive higher 
recycling rates by segregating, consolidating 
and processing scrap materials for reuse 
in other industries. Our focus is on finding 
markets for our largest material waste types – 
blended textiles, rubber, foams, leather and 
synthetic leather. 
Our Nike Grind program, which turned 30 this 
year, gives what was once considered waste 
a new life in Nike Grind partner products 
from flooring to furniture, skateboards to 
iPhone cases and playgrounds to Olympic 
training facilities. In FY22, we saw a 4% 
increase in open-loop recycling as demand 
from regional markets for NIKE manufacturing 
scrap materials grew faster than expected. 
The Home Depot named Nike Grind and 
Future Foam as its 2021 Environmental 
Partner of the Year in recognition of NIKE’s 
dedication to innovation and a circular future. 
The Home Depot is the largest distributor of 
products made with Nike Grind, representing 
over 4.5 million pounds of waste recycled 
every year. Over 10 years of collaboration with 
The Home Depot and Future Foam, we have 
collectively recycled 58 million pounds 
of waste.
We also made progress on solutions 
for harder-to-recycle materials like 
leather. DECODED, a premium lifestyle 
tech accessory brand, launched a new 
sustainability-minded collection, RE_CODED, 
made with Nike Grind leather. NIKE’s posttannery leather scraps are historically 
challenging to reuse, and DECODED is 
the first brand to launch a product using 
this material stream. The RE_CODED 
collection with Nike Grind launched sales 
through Apple, Verizon and other tech 
accessories distributors.
Planet Waste
Nike Grind Footwear Waste Volumes Recycled (Metric Tons)
Waste Source Disposition Method FY20 FY21 FY22
Post-Industrial (Factory Scrap) Reused in NIKE Products and Recycled by Global 
Open Loop Customers
49,629 51,584 59,067
Post-Consumer + Unsellables54
(Consumer Shoes + NIKE Samples 
and Defectives)
Reused by Global Open Loop Customers 79 170 556
Total Footwear 
Materials Recycled
49,708 51,754 59,62355
53 Open-Loop Recycling refers to recycling NIKE footwear waste by third-parties, who subsequently use it to manufacture other non-NIKE products.
54 Unsellables refers to NIKE sample products, defective products and returned products that aren’t fit for resale as NIKE products.
55 In addition to the footwear data detailed in the table above, ~20,000 metric tons of post industrial apparel was open-loop recycled.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
117 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Waste
DISTRIBUTION 
CENTERS 
In FY22 NIKE recycled 85% of distribution 
center waste, cardboard accounted for 
94% of that waste. We aim to drive higher 
and more consistent recycling across all 
distribution centers. We are focused on 
understanding the composition of waste 
that’s not being recycled and improving 
waste sorting and training to maximize 
the percentage of recyclable material 
that is properly segregated and shipped 
to recyclers.
We are also working to increase landfill 
diversion within our distribution centers. In 
the EMEA and Greater China geographies, 
we have already achieved 100% diversion 
with operations. In North America and 
APLA, we are closing the gap and expect to 
engage additional energy recovery capacity 
to increase recycling in FY2356. For North 
America markets we are challenged by 
limited opportunities to increase recycling 
infrastructure. In North America we 
emphasized distribution center education 
and training on collecting and converting 
food waste to compost. That compost 
is used as nutrients for our own NIKE 
community gardens. These are volunteerled gardens help facilitate landfill diversion, 
circularity and community engagement.
NIKE 
HEADQUARTERS 
In FY22, we completed a comprehensive 
waste audit of NIKE WHQ in Oregon and 
developed a targeted waste roadmap to 
our waste-reduction goals. The waste audit 
demonstrated that there were opportunities 
to reduce waste stream contamination 
rates by approximately 40%. We also 
identified food service as the largest waste 
source, contributing 30% of overall waste 
generation. Key reduction levers focused 
on encouraging employees to engage in 
more sustainable behaviors to achieve our 
waste-reduction goals.
Based on the audit, NIKE developed a 
comprehensive Zero Waste Roadmap 
leveraging our strongest asset – our people. 
One example is the TerraCycle gloverecycling program, which launched in our 
kitchens and custodial teams in FY22, 
helping divert 28 metric tons from landfill. 
By introducing programs that make recycling 
and landfill diversion easier, we tap into the 
potential of our NIKE employees.
Not surprisingly, returning to campus 
more than doubled the waste at WHQ 
on a quarter-over-quarter basis. The 
majority of the resulting waste, however, 
was recyclable cardboard packaging 
and furniture that was donated or reused 
between buildings as occupancy plans 
shifted. Despite the challenges created 
by returning to the workplace, the teams 
continued to drive progress toward the 
FY25 sustainability goals.
We educate and engage our athletes to foster 
a sustainable mindset and adopt sustainable 
practices and choices in their day-to-day 
lives through campus events, sustainability 
pop ups, lunch and learn sessions and 
internal communications.
CONVERSE 
HEADQUARTERS 
AND NORTH 
AMERICA RETAIL
Our Converse HQ in Boston has made major 
strides toward waste diversion by upgrading 
to premium service with a local composting 
company, Bootstrap, to increase ease 
and frequency of compost pickup, saving 
approximately $47,000 annually. This service 
includes compost accessibility to Converse 
teammates on every floor and the nearby 
Converse Concept Creation Center (C4) 
in Charlestown.
In FY22, Converse completed a transition to 
paper bags in all North America retail stores. 
Through this initiative, Converse eliminated 
the use of an estimated four million plastic 
bags by the end of 2021 and is continuing 
to extend the effort globally. The effort is 
part of NIKE’s participation in the Fashion 
Pact – a global coalition of companies in the 
fashion and textile industry working toward 
a common set of environmental goals. 
56 Energy recovery is a process in which all or part of solid waste is processed to use the heat content, or other forms of energy, of or from the material.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
118 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
10x the amount of finished product waste 
(FPW) refurbished, recycled or donated 
Quantitative Target
Planet Waste
NIKE’s FPW target is accelerating our 
journey toward product circularity. We know 
product waste is an industry challenge. 
Scaled progress will require the footwear 
and apparel industry to come together to 
develop pre-competitive solutions for the 
toughest barriers, including textile-to-textile 
recycling, cost-efficient reverse logistics and 
technology systems to unlock our ability to 
close the loop for a truly circular ecosystem. 
From setting up internal operations to 
enable circularity to learning how to offer 
compelling takeback services to consumers 
and working with marketplace partners to 
innovate how we recycle product back into 
new out-of-the-box solutions, our work 
continues to both excite and challenge us. 
In FY22, we remained focused on learning 
how to create circular systems for FPW, which 
we define as product that is unsellable across 
our supply chain (e.g., worn digital returns) 
or taken back from consumers through our 
takeback programs. We also accelerated our 
capabilities to keep FPW out of landfill and 
incineration by refurbishing and reselling, 
donating or recycling 3.1 million units of 
finished product. Our goal is to continue 
this acceleration, maximizing product 
refurbishment to extend the life of products 
through resale and reuse, and increasing 
donation and recycling to keep units at their 
highest use for as long as possible.
FPW collected and recycled 
or donated (units)
FY21 FY22
1.9x
2.4M
2.4x
3.1M
2025 Target 
10X
FY20 Baseline 1.3M
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
119 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
To achieve this, we follow our Guiding 
Principles of FPW management:
1 Keep product at its highest value 
for as long as possible
2 Deliver innovative and creative 
solutions that drive long-term 
business value 
3 Ensure a great consumer experience 
4 Be authentic and transparent 
5 Maximize local infrastructure
Using a systems approach, we are 
implementing circular operations 
(capabilities to enable extension of product 
life or reuse of materials) in key locations 
and working with strategic partners to 
receive, process and dispose of product 
in accordance with its highest value in 
alignment with our product waste hierarchy. 
Today, our product channels include Nike 
Refurbished (consumer sales), the vAn 
(internal employee sales), donation and 
recycling. Energy recovery is being utilized 
as a last resort. We recognize that managing 
our own FPW is just one side of the equation, 
and we seek to help consumers responsibly 
manage the product they are no longer 
using through consumer product takeback 
programs (i.e., Reuse-A-Shoe and Recycle 
and Donation).
Planet Waste
Bot Initiated 
Longevity Lab Nike 
Town London
NIKE REFURBISHED
Nike Refurbished extends the life of 
unsellable products (i.e., worn returns, 
cosmetically flawed products, e.g., stains) 
by taking products that cannot be restocked, 
refurbishing them by hand and grading 
them as Like New, Gently Worn or Slightly 
Imperfect. This new reverse logistics 
operations process enables us to offer 
these products at discounted prices at 
select NIKE Factory, Unite and Community 
Stores. Product that is not eligible for 
Nike Refurbished still has a chance at a 
second life too, as we partner with donation 
consolidators, such as Good360, to donate 
gently worn footwear to local communities 
in need. Or, if it’s truly at the end of wearable 
use, we recycle it through our proprietary 
Nike Grind system into materials, which are 
then sold to third parties for different uses.
When the time has come to say goodbye 
to a pair of Nike Refurbished shoes, 
customers can do their part to help keep 
them out of landfills by choosing to donate 
or responsibly recycle them through our 
takeback programs. 
The Nike Refurbished footwear product line 
launched in select stores in the U.S. in March 
2021. By the end of FY22, Nike Refurbished 
was live in 35 stores across the U.S. and 
six stores in EMEA. We are encouraged 
by feedback from our consumers, who 
are delighted to find unique styles at the 
right prices while knowing they are joining 
NIKE in its sustainability journey. We also 
celebrate the contributions from our Retail 
and Operations teams to make these new 
offerings possible. As such, we plan to 
continue scaling this program in FY23.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
120 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Waste
TAKING BACK 
CONSUMER-WORN 
PRODUCT THROUGH 
TAKEBACK SERVICES
As consumers have limited options to donate 
or recycle worn products, for the past 25 
years, NIKE has offered a service called 
Reuse-A-Shoe (RAS) for consumers to bring 
their end-of-life footwear product back to 
NIKE stores so that it can be recycled into 
something new. As apparel and footwear 
waste continues to grow, we are working to 
expand this offering and have introduced a 
new Recycle and Donation (RAD) service, 
which is an evolution of RAS that includes 
apparel and offers a donation pathway 
in addition to recycling. These consumer 
takeback programs empower consumers to 
drop off apparel and footwear at select NIKE 
stores, and based on the condition and level 
of wear, NIKE will either donate to nonprofit 
partners or recycle in a more responsible 
manner to divert end-of-life product waste 
from landfill.
NIKE Hongdae
In FY22, we expanded access to consumer 
product takeback services to most of our 
geographies, offering the service across 
300 NIKE stores. While our expansion efforts 
have been successful, we’re learning we 
need to improve awareness of this offering 
so more consumers can take advantage 
of this program, which gives consumers 
a better option than throwing product 
away and enables more people to partner 
with NIKE on our Move to Zero journey. 
Through consumer insights, we have found 
that close to 80% of NIKE consumers are 
interested in using our RAD service. Moving 
forward, we intend to expand access to 
such services, while also exploring ways 
to integrate information about these 
services into digital and marketing plans 
to improve utilization of these services and 
create seamless integration with the NIKE 
member experience.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
121 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Waste
THE VAN
Product not fit for consumer sale (i.e., 
samples or products with quality issues) 
is sold at a discount through our internal 
employee website, The vAn. Our goal is to 
reduce volumes through this channel as we 
continue improving manufacturing quality 
and reduce the need for physical samples.
DONATION
At NIKE, we continually look for opportunities 
to bridge our work across People, Planet 
and Play. Our product donation program is a 
perfect example of this intersection. Not only 
are we able to extend the life of products, but 
we are also able to deliver them to those who 
need them most. When product is no longer 
deemed sellable but still has a functional 
life – or when unforeseen events impact our 
communities – we work with consolidator 
nonprofit organizations like Good360, 
Soles4Souls, Good Sports and Delivering 
Good to help deliver product where it’s 
needed, in a responsible manner. 
In FY22, we were able to donate nearly 
1.02 million units to schools and community 
organizations. An additional 45,000 units 
were donated to nonprofit organizations 
around the globe through the product 
donation disposition channel. This product, 
which would have otherwise been recycled or 
destroyed, benefits the community by serving 
the highest need, closest to source.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
122 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
RECYCLING
When product is truly at its end-of-life and 
cannot be used again through resale or 
donation, our goal is to recycle the product 
through responsible end-of-life processes. 
For footwear, recycling means sending 
product through our state-of-the-art Nike 
Grind machines in the U.S. and EMEA. 
After grinding up this product, materials 
are separated by type (rubber, foam and textile 
fluff) so that they can be incorporated into new 
items. In our other locations, where we don’t 
have Nike Grind technology, we work with 
providers to manage our end-of-life process.
We have been incorporating Nike Grind 
into products, retail spaces, workplace 
environments, athletic facilities, skateboards 
and more for nearly 30 years. That means 
fewer materials in landfills, and more in the 
hands (and under the feet) of athletes.
In FY22, we collaborated with Kirei, an 
acoustic solutions company in California, 
to recycle our upper textile fluff material 
from finished product waste into their Air 
Baffle product. The Air Baffle is an acoustic 
element filled with Nike Grind fluff to help 
absorb sound in open spaces. We continued 
to work with Playtop and Hero Flooring, 
among others, to recycle rubber from 
ground-up shoes into play surfaces and 
flooring, respectively. 
Additionally, in EMEA, Hooks Creative 
designed a clothes hanger with 50% fluff 
content and 50% non-NIKE recycled material 
that has been introduced to the entire 
European Logistics Center campus and will 
start to roll out in other EMEA offices. We 
have pursued multiple other destinations for 
recycled footwear FPW, specifically mixed 
foam and additional fluff grind. With a focus 
on sport surfaces and flooring, we work 
closely with external companies to research 
and develop product offerings that can utilize 
these waste streams as feedstock. 
For apparel in geographies outside of the 
U.S., we work with third-party pre-processors 
and recyclers to maximize recycling solutions. 
In FY23, we plan to expand apparelrecycling capabilities to the U.S. as well. 
We choose third parties based, in part, on 
the level of transparency of their processes 
and their ability to help us achieve our 
sustainability goals. 
Recycling technologies today may not be the 
recycling technologies of the future. Greater 
China is working with the Circular Economy 
Research Institute of Tongji University to 
study advanced shoe- and apparel-recycling 
technologies to improve overall recycling 
efficiency through heat separation and 
artificial intelligence sorting systems. This will 
help us reduce inefficient manual processes 
and improve overall recycling capacity. As 
we continue the search for true, structural 
and sustainable recycling solutions at scale 
for harder-to-recycle materials, we also work 
with waste-to-energy vendors to responsibly 
dispose of remaining materials.
Cuong Luong 
(right), a member of 
NIKE’s Responsible 
Supply Chain team 
in Vietnam, talks 
footwear recycling 
options with Feng 
Tay leadership.
Planet Waste
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
123 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
25% reduction in freshwater usage 
(L per kg) in textile dyeing and finishing
Quantitative Target
Planet Water
For the past decade, the World Economic 
Forum (WEF) has listed water crises 
as one of the top five global risks that 
negatively impact economies and societies. 
Historically, water has been available in 
the driest areas, and flooding patterns 
were predictable across the globe. As the 
climate warms, the world is beginning to 
see more extremes – which often means 
too little or too much water. An increase in 
population, industrial and socio-economic 
growth will add more stress to existing 
water resources, resulting in scarcity and 
competition. Increasing droughts contribute 
to wildfires and other problems. A decrease 
in the water table can degrade water quality, 
often leading to increasing concentrations 
of minerals and salts that are expensive to 
treat, resulting in increased cost. On the 
other extreme, more violent storms are 
already making flooding a new risk in areas 
that didn’t worry about it before. Experiences 
around the world – water rationing in Taiwan; 
droughts in Brazil, California and India – 
demonstrate the WEF’s concerns are real. 
Without a robust water sustainability 
program, textile industry suppliers will face 
tough and costly decisions related to their 
businesses. NIKE is working to decouple 
business growth from constrained resources 
by minimizing our overall environmental 
footprint. We can’t do this without the 
commitment of suppliers, and encourage 
every facility to pursue – in terms of 
business growth, productivity and social 
responsibility – a more sustainable and 
water-efficient future.
Freshwater use/kg textile 
dyeing & finishing (L/kg)
FY21 FY22
-7%
78.68
-9%
76.91
2025 Target
-25% 
2020 Baseline
84.36
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
124 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Water (Million Liters)
Textile Dyeing and Finishing57 FY20 FY21 FY22
Municipal/City Water to Facility 13,277.6 13,067.5 13,386.7
Ground Water 4,804.5 4,391.4 5,795.4
Surface Water 2,102.4 1,466.9 1,733.3
Rainwater Collection 34.5 16.5 12.8
Condensate Use 390.6 395.7 305.3
Total Freshwater Use 20,609.5 19,338.0 21,233.4
Planet Water
We are making progress toward 
achieving our 2025 freshwater-reduction 
target through our strategy, which has 
three components: 
1 Create Awareness among suppliers 
that water crises are real, and it’s 
necessary to reduce our dependence 
on freshwater. 
2 Drive Commitment from suppliers to 
do their part to reduce their freshwater 
use. We collaborated with suppliers to 
establish freshwater reduction-targets 
that will help us reach our 2025 target. 
3 Build Capability among suppliers so 
they are executing their freshwaterreduction targets using generally 
accepted best practices for water 
management and wastewater 
treatment. The indications are that 
training and adoption of best practices 
are consistent and robust. 
In FY22, we reduced freshwater usage per 
kilogram by 9% from our FY20 baseline by 
implementing process improvements and 
investments in recycling technologies, with 
the support of seven of our supply chain’s 
top 10 water users. Among them, we saw 
notable reductions from their respective 
FY20 baselines achieved from facilities.
The Tong Hong Tannery in China reduced 
its freshwater use in FY22 by 12.4% from 
its FY20 baseline through several processimprovement strategies. The Tong Hong 
site consolidated its product order category 
and used higher-manufacturing-efficiency 
equipment to achieve the exact product 
specification, which resulted in reduction 
of water and energy usage. Also, the facility 
optimized the wastewater treatment system 
to produce higher wastewater-reuse quality, 
which helped the site reduce its overall 
freshwater consumption by increasing 
the recycling rate.
The Sadesa facility reduced its water 
intensity by 20.8% in FY22 from its FY20 
baseline with investments in advanced 
oxidation and recycling technologies in the 
wastewater treatment plant. Since FY15, the 
number of wastewater-recycling installations 
has continued to increase to the point where 
wastewater recycling is a standard feature of 
any new construction by suppliers. 
In FY22, our in-scope facilities faced 
headwinds largely brought on by impacts 
of COVID-19, resulting in the stalling of 
certain water-reduction projects as well 
as staffing issues. Nevertheless, suppliers 
displayed continued commitment to their 
sustainability targets and were able to rise 
above these difficulties to still achieve the 
overall collective water reduction target of 
9% from the FY20 baseline for FY22.
57 Includes focus suppliers only. Focus suppliers represent key suppliers involved in the dyeing and/or finishing of 
materials, which directly support footwear and apparel finished product assembly.
Responsible water 
management at 
Chang Shin’s 
footwear facility 
in Indonesia 
includes wastewater 
treatment and 
recycling.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
125 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Water restored (L) FY21 FY22
2.06B 3.72B
2025 Target
13B 13 billion liters restored through a portfolio 
of projects that support long-term
resilience for water-stressed ecosystems 
and communities within our extended 
cotton supply chain
Quantitative Target
Planet Water
Cotton accounts for 69% of NIKE’s water 
footprint and is directly impacted by water 
stressors such as drought, water scarcity, 
floods and pollution. In addition to effects 
on the cotton supply, local communities – 
including those within water basins that 
support cotton farming – and ecosystems 
are disproportionately affected by these 
water stressors. We continue to adapt to 
uncertainty as global climate patterns shift, 
geopolitical issues emerge and other natural 
phenomena arise leading to shifts in project 
scope and impact. Creating water resilience 
in our cotton sourcing is critical to helping 
NIKE continue to produce products in a way 
that protects the workers and ecosystems 
that make up our supply chain.
We aim to restore 13 billion liters by 2025 in 
water-stressed regions within our extended 
cotton supply chain – including Australia, 
India and Pakistan. 
Our strategy to reach our target is driven 
by collaboration with conservation leaders. 
We work in partnership with globally 
recognized environmental nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), including The Nature 
Conservancy (TNC) and World Wildlife Fund 
(WWF), who help us define project scope and 
strategy, implement interventions in priority 
basins, and monitor and report on the social 
and environmental impacts generated from 
restoration activities.
Through these partnerships, we are 
prioritizing multi-year projects that 
focus on three primary objectives: 
1 Water restoration and protection
2 Water for productive use
3 Water access
FY20 Baseline 0.65B
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
126 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
In Australia, NIKE supported the second 
phase of a two-phase project aimed at 
adding 5,000 hectares of wetland to a 
conservation covenant in the Murray– 
Darling Basin in partnership with TNC. 
The combined phases of the project assisted 
in returning the land from commercial use 
back to its natural state, restoring 3.71 billion 
liters of water in FY22, through three major 
interventions:
1 Low-impact grazing: converting land 
previously used for growing by moving 
grazing animals to areas based on 
vegetative maturity to reduce runoff 
and increase average vegetative cover
2 Conservation covenant: protecting 
the property from being used for 
commercial agricultural practices, 
allowing for the regeneration of more 
natural conditions, enhancement 
of existing forested areas and 
improvement of both water quality 
and water quantity
3 Wetland restoration: rehydration of the 
floodplain in areas previously designed 
for commercial production, contributing 
to the creation of a new wildlife habitat 
and increased infiltration to local 
groundwater sources 
From FY20-22, NIKE’s support contributed 
to the inundation of 47,277 hectares in the 
region, a much larger area than expected. 
This in turn supported a massive colonial 
bird breeding event and a second breeding 
event for many pelicans in the region. 
In addition, the project facilitated enhanced 
wetland fringe vegetation growth and 
improved habitat for a range of species, 
resulting in feral animal control and 
increased sightings of critically endangered 
fauna, such as the plains-wanderer, 
a vulnerable ground-dwelling bird.
The project also supported ongoing efforts 
to enable a return of land management to 
the Nari Nari Tribal Council – the Aboriginal 
landowners in the region. This included 
the finalization and launch of “Gayini: Our 
Home,” a guidebook of native plant and 
animal species found on the land by the 
Nari Nari Tribal Council.
In Pakistan, NIKE also laid the groundwork 
in FY22 for additional water restoration 
projects in the Indus River basin with WWF. 
This work included implementing integrated 
watershed management strategies to 
improve overall water quantity and quality, 
educate and support farmers with waterefficient agricultural practices and help 
protect endangered species native to 
the region.
Planet Water
Water restored (L)
FY20 FY21 FY22
Australia 650M 2.05B 3.71B
India 0 11.7M 11.7M
Total 650M 2.06B 3.72B
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
127 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Adopt clean chemistry alternatives 
for our 10 priority chemistries across 
our supply chain
Quantitative Target
Planet Chemistry
Every NIKE product leverages chemistry to 
drive innovation, influence design, improve 
performance and achieve our sustainability 
ambitions. While the essential role of 
chemistry within our business is clear, we 
recognize that it must be well managed to 
maximize its value and minimize possible 
risks. To accomplish this, we have developed 
a chemical prioritization strategy that 
integrates our approach to global regulatory 
compliance with proactive efforts to scale 
and integrate cleaner chemistry seamlessly 
into our business.
# of priority chemistries with 
clean chemistry alternative
FY21 FY22
0 0
2025 Target
10
To develop NIKE’s chemical prioritization 
strategy, we consider the health and 
environmental impacts of the individual 
chemicals as well as chemistry mixtures 
used to make our products. We closely 
track the continually evolving regulatory 
landscape and review the latest scientific 
findings to help us to proactively influence 
chemistry decisions in our supply chain. 
Finally, we assess how chemicals are used, 
including the volumes, types of application 
and availability of safe alternatives, to help 
us set realistic targets for the future.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
128 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
The foundational requirements in NIKE’s 
Code of Conduct set the basis for our 
chemistry strategy. Based on this policy, 
all suppliers must properly manage 
chemistry and create approaches that 
help meet our Restricted Substances List 
(RSL) and ZDHC Manufacturing Restricted 
Substances List (MRSL) requirements. 
We continue to support development of 
transparent guidelines, tools and training 
programs within our industry through work 
in groups such as Apparel and Footwear 
International RSL Management and 
the ZDHC Foundation. Together, these 
programs continue to accelerate us toward 
realizing the vision of zero discharge of 
hazardous chemicals.
Our facility compliance program includes 
significant requirements on chemicals 
management and measurement that are 
elevated through tools such as the FEM and 
SLCP. Members of our supply chain are on 
a journey to continually improve their ability 
to manage chemistry safely and effectively, 
and we continue to raise the bar on our 
foundational requirements. By creating 
Planet Chemistry
training and effective remediation programs 
as well as driving engagement with industry 
groups, we will continue to elevate these 
capabilities and monitor implementation 
across our supply chain. 
In addition to our facility compliance 
program focusing on chemicals 
management, use and disposal, we 
continue more than 20 years of chemistry 
engagement and implementation with 
suppliers through our Chemistry Playbook 
and RSL program. The NIKE Chemistry 
Playbook & RSL represents our approach to 
managing chemicals throughout the supply 
chain, from procurement of input chemistries 
that meet ZDHC MRSL requirements all the 
way to testing thousands of materials and 
finished goods annually.
We will continually strive to create 
innovations that support helping athletes 
perform their best while we move toward 
cleaner chemistry inputs and proactively 
steward resources. 
Materials suppliers 
like Dong Jin Textile 
in Indonesia manage 
color and chemistry 
with automated 
precision.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
129 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
Planet Chemistry
10 PRIORITY 
CHEMISTRIES
We created a list of 10 priority chemistries 
where we have a target to go above and 
beyond our list of more than 400 substances 
that are tightly controlled within our RSL. 
These priority chemistries solve specific 
challenges that we have uncovered and help 
us advance safer materials flowing into and 
through a circular economy. Adopting these 
cleaner chemistry alternatives is NIKE’s 2025 
chemistry target. 
Another critical part of our work to 
scale cleaner chemistry is our chemical 
assessment process. This embedded 
process is used on new chemistries coming 
into our supply chain and provides a 
consistent measure for compliance that can 
be used across a variety of chemistry types.
2025 Priority Chemical Phase-out Timelines
FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24 FY25
Market access and fulfilling commitments
 Scale clean chemistry approaches 
with key suppliers to set a new bar
 Lead industry to integrate clean chemistry 
alternatives in product & supply chain
PFAS
Dimethyl formamide (DMFa)
DCP (dicumyl peroxide)
Zinc Pyrithione
NPEOs
Organic Solvents (VOCs)
Formamide
Bisphenols
Formaldehyde
Neoprene
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
130 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
People
Planet
FY22 PROGRESS
In FY22, we made significant progress 
toward our per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances (PFAS) phaseout in waterrepellent finishes in all product engines. 
In 2017, we set a target to eliminate all 
Perfluorochemical-based finishes from our 
product line. We have achieved our PFAS 
phaseout goal without sacrificing our high 
durability and performance standards or 
aesthetics. Throughout this phaseout, we 
completed thorough chemistry assessments 
on all PFAS alternatives to help us scale only 
better chemistry across the supply chain. 
We continue to track toward our goal of 
100% PFAS-free durable water repellents 
through close collaboration with material 
and chemical suppliers. 
The final phase of our work to eliminate 
PFAS from our supply chain is phasing 
out of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
membranes, commonly found in waterproof 
apparel and footwear. PTFE membranes use 
PFAS chemicals in their production and may 
release PFAS at end-of-life under extreme 
conditions. We currently anticipate we will 
be able to phase out PTFE membranes 
by the end of the 2024 calendar year.
NIKE is also working to push suppliers 
in the supply chain to reduce the use of 
Dimethylformamide (DMFa). DMFa is a 
common industrial solvent for chemical 
reactions used in the production of synthetic 
and coated leather. We have worked with 
material and chemical suppliers to trial 
DMFa alternatives, and are impressed by the 
amount of innovation in this space. We have 
achieved 100% DMFa-free coated natural 
leathers, and we have seen strong adoption 
of DMFa-free synthetic suedes.
However, we anticipate challenges meeting 
our overall goal of being 100% DMFa-free by 
2025. COVID-19-related slowdowns delayed 
essential research and development needed 
to validate safe DMFa alternatives. Further, 
we expect pricing and scaling challenges 
as suppliers work to build up scale for 
DMFa-free materials. We are working crossfunctionally to overcome these challenges 
and eventually phase out the use of DMFa 
in all NIKE materials.
We have transitioned more than 70% of our 
total EVA foam usage in footwear dicumyl 
peroxide (DCP)-free. DCP is a crosslinking 
agent for polymers, including in EVA foam 
manufacturing, that can be problematic in 
some environments.
Planet Chemistry
Our goal is to reach over 80% DCP-free 
across all our footwear EVA foam in FY23, 
putting us in a good position to achieve our 
100% DCP-free EVA foam target by 2025.
Neoprene58 (aka polychloroprene) is a 
family of synthetic foam rubbers that are 
produced by polymerization of chloroprene. 
Neoprene materials can be manufactured 
using substances that are skin sensitizers, 
and in addition, the production of neoprene 
can have negative impacts on the climate. 
For our neoprene target, we identified 
several alternatives that are aligned with our 
sustainable chemistry requirements. To slow 
continued proliferation of neoprene, we have 
implemented a policy that styles introduced 
after 2023 will only use alternatives approved 
through our chemistry assessments.
We are also scaling industry tools to capture 
and assess chemical inventory conformity 
to the MRSL. While this will not give us 
complete information on every substance in 
use at this time, it helps make sure that any 
MRSL-listed substance is prohibited from 
intentional use. Future efforts to push for an 
industry approach that enables capture of all 
chemical details are a key area of focus. 
The presence of contaminant chemicals 
in recycled material streams is an ongoing 
challenge that will be amplified as we 
diversify our recycled content streams (an 
example of this is PFAS). The introduction 
of new material streams that haven’t 
traditionally been used in our industry 
can be challenging from a sustainable 
chemistry perspective. 
58 Chemicals used in neoprene are also known carcinogens. In addition, the production of neoprene can contribute to climate change and volatile organic 
compounds emitted in the chemical processing plants can be harmful to human health and the environment.
131 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
04 PLAY
136 Active Kids
143 Inclusive Community
147 Employee Engagement
153 Community Investment
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
132 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Introduction
All athletes* should benefit from the joy and 
and movement of play. But we know that not 
every child and not every community have 
access to the same opportunities.
Girls are dropping out of sport at twice 
the rate of boys, and systemic inequities 
leave some communities in greater need. 
That’s why we continue to focus our 
investments on leveling the playing field for 
all athletes*, now and for future generations 
to come. Because when everyone’s 
included, that’s a win.
* If you have a body, you are an athlete. - Bill Bowerman, Co-Founder NIKE
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
133 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Introduction
At NIKE, we believe in the 
transformative power of sport to 
move the world forward. Creating 
a more active and healthier world 
requires an inclusive approach.
We’re tackling systemic inequality 
through our commitment to getting 
kids active and building inclusive 
communities through these three 
key strategies: 
1 Increasing girls’ participation 
in play and sport
2 Recruiting and training 
more representative coaches
3 Supporting diverse leaders 
who reflect the communities 
they serve
With more barriers to sport than 
ever before, the world is moving 
less – leaving girls and kids from 
marginalized communities, who 
are disproportionately impacted, 
on the sidelines. As a brand guided 
by our values, we are uniquely 
positioned to see the intersectional 
opportunities and leverage our 
resources to take action and create 
greater access to sport for all.
We know by driving inclusivity in 
spaces off the field, we can continue 
to elevate equal participation on 
the field. That’s why in addition 
to supporting partnerships and 
programs that get kids moving, we 
also invest in organizations that 
advance equality through economic 
empowerment, education innovation 
and social justice reform.
With our strategic focus, we will 
continue to influence the future of 
sport so that it can be a place where 
everyone belongs. Our ambition is to 
remove barriers to positively change 
the culture of sport, with a lens 
toward tomorrow.
Throughout my life, I’ve learned that there’s power in play. From my first 
childhood races with friends in my hometown of Kingston, Jamaica, to 
winning my fifth 100 meters title at the World Athletics Championships 
last summer in Eugene, Oregon (and yes, Olympic gold medals in 
between), I can confidently say that sport has made me stronger, both 
on and off the track. It’s made me a better athlete, a better teammate, 
a better member of my community, and most meaningfully, a better 
mother. And I hope it will do the same for you, too. When I was in high 
school, there was a woman who saw something in me that I didn’t see 
in myself. She invested in me and believed in my future. Her kindness lit 
a fire, allowing me to dream bigger and inspiring me to make a similar 
impact on other kids’ lives. That initial kindness eventually inspired me to 
launch the Pocket Rocket Foundation to help young athletes in Jamaica 
who also hope to reach the top of their sport. I went back to where 
my journey began, now with the support of all of those who believe in 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Shelly-Ann
Fraser-Pryce
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
134 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Future Address
With love, 
Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce
Throughout my life, I’ve learned that there’s power 
in play. 
From my first childhood races with friends in 
my hometown of Kingston, Jamaica, to winning 
my fifth 100 meters title at the World Athletics 
Championships last summer in Eugene, Oregon 
(and yes, Olympic gold medals in between), I can 
confidently say that sport has made me stronger, 
both on and off the track. It’s made me a better 
athlete, a better teammate, a better member of 
my community, and most meaningfully, a better 
mother. And I hope it will do the same for you, too.
When I was in high school, there was a woman who 
saw something in me that I didn’t see in myself. 
She invested in me and believed in my future. Her 
kindness lit a fire, allowing me to dream bigger and 
inspiring me to make a similar impact on other kids’ 
lives. That initial kindness eventually inspired me 
to launch the Pocket Rocket Foundation to help 
young athletes in Jamaica who also hope to reach 
the top of their sport. I went back to where my 
journey began, now with the support of all of those 
who believe in me, including NIKE. It matters to me 
that I’m able to make a difference and show up my 
best self in all forms.
My wish for you is to find the strength in play… to 
find somewhere that will support you as an athlete, 
and all that you are and will be. And may you 
learn from the wisdom I’ve been lucky enough to 
experience first-hand: that success neither begins 
nor ends with you. Whose kindness has moved 
you to action? Who has inspired you to dream 
bigger and achieve more, not just for yourself, but 
for others? 
This much I know: we go faster, together. I’m not 
slowing down anytime soon, and neither can you. 
We’ve still got plenty of barriers left to break.
“May you learn from the wisdom I’ve been 
lucky enough to experience first-hand: that 
success neither begins nor ends with you.”
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
135 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Future Address
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
136 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Active Kids
In FY22, we focused on our key strategies to 
accelerate greater change for girls – at scale. 
First, to help increase girls’ participation 
in sport in our key cities and employee 
backyards, we continued to invest in new 
play- and sport-based programs through 
our partnerships with local community 
organizations. Second, to create a global 
and cultural shift, we collaborated with some 
of the most influential female athletes from 
around the world to amplify girls’ voices and 
the need to improve their sport experience. 
We also partnered with renowned 
institutions in the coaching space to create 
industry-leading tools and training materials 
that help coaches everywhere be more 
inclusive and responsive to girls’ needs. 
Drive sustained community impact 
by getting kids moving in our key 
cities and sourcing backyards with 
50% girl participation
Quantitative Target
% of girl participation FY21 FY22
52% 50%
2025 Target
50%
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
137 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
As a result of these efforts, we directly 
helped nearly 760,000 kids to move – 50% 
of whom were girls – through our community 
partners’ diverse offering of play and sport 
programs. Knowing the critical role coaches 
play, we also shared our best practices 
and tools with more than 17,000 coaches 
and helped train nearly 9,000 of them in 
delivering fun, inclusive experiences to 
all kids.
Around the world, NIKE is helping to increase 
girls’ participation in sport locally – in our key 
cities and employee backyards – by investing 
in partnerships with more than 120 grassroots 
community organizations that deliver playand sport-based programs.
In Los Angeles, we teamed up with the Play 
Equity Fund to launch LA Made to Play 
Neighborhoods. The three-year, $1.5 million 
program empowers 13 grassroots youth 
play and sport organizations through an 
innovative, place-based approach that 
focuses on neighborhoods and brings 
together local partners to leverage resources 
and tackle root causes that prevent girls from 
participating in play and sport. To create the 
most transformative change, the programs 
focus on LA youth who are the least able 
to access play and sport – Latina girls – in 
two of the neighborhoods with the greatest 
opportunity to close the gap in play equity: 
Boyle Heights and Watts. 
In Mexico City, we launched Jugamos 
Juntas, an initiative designed to give girls 
access to safe, inclusive and fun experiences 
in play and sport, in collaboration with 
Laureus Sport for Good. The three-year 
investment provides funds to strengthen five 
community organizations so they can expand 
opportunities for girls to play. Jugamos 
Juntas also emphasizes the important role 
that coaches play in inspiring girls on and off 
the field. The program will recruit and train 
coaches, with a focus on women, to help 
them create positive environments where 
girls and boys play and thrive together. 
In Paris, we extended our partnership with 
sport-based community organization Sport 
dans la Ville, maintaining our commitment 
to increasing girls’ access to play and sport. 
Through our support, Sport dans la Ville 
provides sport activities, cultural events and 
workshops to more than 2,000 girls locally.
Play Active Kids
 “I feel empowered when I think 
about the opportunities to help 
girls get active because of the 
incredible impact we can have on 
their lives as they find their own 
power through sport and play. 
Together, we’re addressing barriers 
to sport for girls in Japan and 
beyond and making movement 
more accessible to girls.”
Miki Morimoto
Director, Asia Pacific 
Social & Community 
Impact 
People Profile
375K
girls engaged in local play and 
sport programs this year
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
138 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Active Kids
NIKE also supports Paris-based PLAY 
International, which uses sport as a vehicle 
for education and social change to help 
drive their commitment toward equality 
and empowerment for girls. Over the 
past four years, NIKE’s support of the 
Active Schools program has helped train 
hundreds of primary school teachers to 
inspire thousands of children to play. And 
by pioneering innovative solutions like their 
Playlab program, their experts are helping 
level the playing field by creating games and 
activities that encourage boys and girls to 
play together.
NIKE is welcoming all kids to play through 
our continued support of mixed-gender 
programs. NIKE’s new partnership and 
program in Seoul is a good example of 
this. In FY22, we launched Active Modoo 
in partnership with ChildFund Korea and 
We Meet Up Sports. The program’s name 
is inspired by its aim to help “modoo” – 
meaning “everyone” in Korean – get active 
by providing equal access to play and sport. 
Active Modoo takes a child-centered 
approach and offers fun, physical activities 
to children ages 7–12 by providing positive 
coaching skills to professional coaches 
and teachers as well as parents and NIKE 
employees. The program also tackles a 
common misperception among parents 
– that increasing a child’s amount of 
physical activities leads to lower academic 
achievement. The program offers workshops 
and physical activity sessions to educate 
parents on the benefits of physical activity 
and demonstrate the proven link to 
increased concentration and kids’ overall 
well-being.
Since launching in China in 2019, Boundless 
Girls, our innovative program that unleashes 
the potential of girls though the power 
of sport, has reached over 90,000 girls 
across more than 500 schools. Through a 
partnership with the China Foundation for 
Rural Development (CFRD), the program 
has scaled to include 12 grassroots 
organizations across China. And together 
with China Children and Teenagers’ 
Fund and Enjoy Volunteering, we kicked 
off our Boundless Girls Summer Camp 
in nine locations, which brought nearly 
120 university student volunteers to serve 
as coaches and role models. The university 
students and NIKE employees collectively 
dedicated more than 10,000 hours to 
inclusive play and sport sessions with the 
girls, ensuring that everyone felt empowered, 
supported and inspired.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
139 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
FY22 also marked our China team’s ninth 
year in driving Active Schools, a program 
developed in collaboration with China’s 
Ministry of Education and China Education 
Development Foundation. The initiative 
enables physical education (PE) teachers 
and staff to transform children’s sport 
experiences through innovative PE classes. 
Nationally, the program has reached more 
than 5.4 million kids and 12,000 PE teachers 
across 10,500 schools. Despite community 
lockdowns due to the ongoing COVID-19 
pandemic, Active Schools still increased 
the number of primary school PE teachers 
reached by generating digital capacitybuilding content and by empowering 
teachers who were awarded the prestigious 
Active Schools Innovation Award to develop 
their own social media content showcasing 
fun coaching tips, inspiring other teachers 
and coaches and garnering nearly 
seven million views.
To continue to help remove barriers for 
girls and women in sport, we partnered 
with some of the world’s most influential, 
community-oriented athletes.
In FY22, NIKE created a first-of-its-kind Nike 
Athlete Think Tank to hear directly from our 
elite women athletes and global catalysts — 
representing different parts of the world, 
sport experiences and varying stages of 
their careers and lives. Our goals were to 
learn from their unique experiences in sport, 
better understand their needs and hear 
their ideas to improve the experience of 
girls and women in sport. In response 
to athlete desire to directly impact the 
communities and causes they care about, 
NIKE invested $1.3 million through Charities 
Aid Foundation America in order to support 
organizations identified by Nike Athlete Think 
Tank members. Collectively, this powerful 
group of organizations champion a sense 
of belonging for women, girls and other 
marginalized community members 
— on and off the playing field.
Additionally, in our EMEA region, we 
partnered with more elite athletes to 
create positive impact in our communities. 
With a shared vision to inspire the next 
generation and give kids more access 
to sport, we worked closely with Bebe 
Vio, Ebrar Karakurt, Ramla Ali, Giannis 
Antetokounmpo, John McAvoy and Rudy 
Gobert to develop and support seven 
programs directly impacting the lives of 
6,000 kids from marginalized communities.
NIKE established 
the Athlete Think 
Tank to hear directly 
from our female 
athletes with the 
goal of improving 
the experience of 
girls and women 
in sport.
Play Active Kids
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
140 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Research shows that how a girl feels about 
her coach is one of the most important 
factors determining whether she keeps 
playing sports. That’s why we’re helping 
to recruit and train more representative 
coaches, and it’s why we’re investing in 
coaching tools that help coaches create 
positive, inclusive environments for all kids, 
especially girls.
A recent survey focused on girls’ attitudes 
found that 67% of girls and young women 
ages 7–21 felt more sad, anxious or worried 
because of the pandemic59. Because we 
know the need to focus on mental health 
is so important NIKE became the founding 
partner of The Center for Healing and 
Justice through Sport (CHJS), a nonprofit 
organization fueling a movement to bring 
research-backed, healing-centered 
sport training to youth coaches across 
North America. With help from CHJS, 
NIKE is training many of its retail store 
employees who serve as NIKE Community 
Ambassadors to coach and inspire kids in 
their communities. We also offered trainings 
to our corporate employees, North America 
Made to Play partners and consumers 
through our NIKE Brand channels.
The Tucker Center for Research on Girls 
& Women in Sport at the University of 
Minnesota is a preeminent interdisciplinary 
research center leading a global effort to 
accelerate change for girls and women 
in sport. The Tucker Center’s research 
consistently informs coaching across the 
U.S. and around the world, making it a key 
partner for NIKE in fulfilling what is a critical 
need for coaches: coaching tools that 
address gender biases and stereotypes 
and keep 11–17-year-old girls from dropping 
out of sport. Together with the Tucker 
Center, we began the development of an 
industry-first online coaching tool called 
“Coaching HER” – our most comprehensive, 
evidence-based and pilot-tested resource 
on coaching girls. Coaching HER, now 
available online, is designed to help 
keep girls in sport. It expands on NIKE’s 
robust collection of free, downloadable 
coaching resources available on nike.com/
madetoplay: the Made to Play Coaching Girls 
Guide, Coaching for Belonging, Sports Bra 
Playbook and Hijab Playbook.
NYC NIKE 
Coaching Summit
Play Active Kids
59 https://www.girlguiding.org.uk/globalassets/docs-and-resources/research-and-campaigns/girls-attitudes-survey-2021-report.pdf
Fifteen years ago, multiple professional women’s tennis events in China 
seemed impossible. Today there are more than 10. This rapid expansion 
of not only tennis, but also the rise of women’s sport in my country 
gives me more hope for the next generation than I ever could have 
imagined. When I hear people say that I am part of the rise of tennis 
in China, I am humbled and I don’t take it for granted. That’s why 
I’ve committed to continuing my work off the court, building training 
programs for the next generation of Chinese tennis players. I may be 
the first Grand Slam singles champion from Asia but I certainly won’t be 
the last, if I have anything to do with it. Since announcing my retirement 
in 2014, I’ve had a lot of time to think about what I can do to push 
the conversation about women in sports further. I’ve spent my career 
alongside greats like Serena, endlessly inspired by her courage, talent 
and strength. Women like Serena have taught me the power of using 
your voice to level the playing field for female athletes of all ages. While 
ADDRESSING 
THE FUTURE 
with
Li Na
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
141 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Future Address
With love, 
Li Na
“I believe we are collectively moving in the 
right direction. What’s key is that we never 
let up. We can’t. You can’t.”
Fifteen years ago, multiple professional women’s 
tennis events in China seemed impossible. Today 
there are more than 10. This rapid expansion of 
not only tennis, but also the rise of women’s sport 
in my country gives me more hope for the next 
generation than I ever could have imagined.
When I hear people say that I am part of the rise of 
tennis in China, I am humbled and I don’t take it for 
granted. That’s why I’ve committed to continuing 
my work off the court, building training programs 
for the next generation of Chinese tennis players. 
I may be the first Grand Slam singles champion 
from Asia but I certainly won’t be the last, if I have 
anything to do with it. 
Since announcing my retirement in 2014, I’ve had 
a lot of time to think about what I can do to push 
the conversation about women in sports further. 
I’ve spent my career alongside greats like Serena, 
endlessly inspired by her courage, talent 
and strength.
Women like Serena have taught me the power of 
using your voice to level the playing field for female 
athletes of all ages. While every country is in a 
different place on that journey, I believe we are 
collectively moving in the right direction. What’s 
key is that we never let up. We can’t. You can’t. 
There are too many opportunities for our youth 
– especially the next generation of girls – still 
to come.
I am proud of the work I do with NIKE and the role 
the company has played to recruit and keep girls 
in sport, and I know the momentum will only grow. 
A truly meaningful experience for me has been 
supporting Boundless Girls, a program dedicated 
to helping girls unlock barriers to sport participation 
and embrace their love of the game, regardless of 
their backgrounds.
When you’re old enough to look back 15 years 
and see the way that China and our world have 
changed for women in sports, I hope you see the 
continued progress I have been lucky to witness, 
so that you may understand how fast things can 
progress when there is a shared vision for making 
the world a better place.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
142 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Future Address
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
143 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Inclusive Community
We are working to help create a world where 
equal opportunity exists both on and off the 
field. In FY22, we expanded our efforts to 
address systemic barriers by deepening our 
partnerships with organizations that focus 
on addressing inequality. These efforts 
are reflected in our total investment of $33 
million in the fiscal year. That investment 
includes $15 million toward our Black 
Community Commitment (BCC) from NIKE, 
Inc. and Jordan Brand in North America, 
which was amplified by another $5 million 
from Michael Jordan personally (not 
included in the total for this target). We also 
invested a further $18 million to advance 
inclusivity and equality.
Invest $125 million to support 
organizations working to level 
the playing field and address 
racial inequality
Quantitative Target
$ invested
FY21
FY22 Cummulative
$36.6M
$33M $69.6M
2025 Target
$125M
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
144 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Inclusive Community
Further investment was made in an 
additional 50 local organizations in seven 
U.S. cities where NIKE employees live and 
work – Boston; Chicago; Los Angeles; 
Memphis; New York City; Portland, OR; 
and St. Louis. An additional seven grantees 
were based in Atlanta, Houston, Miami, 
Philadelphia and Washington, D.C..
Partner Highlight: Pensole Lewis College 
of Business and Design
A BCC grantee uniquely positioned at 
the intersection of diversity and design is 
Pensole Lewis College of Business and 
Design. In 2013, Lewis College of Business 
(its original name), based in Detroit, closed 
its doors. Former NIKE footwear designer 
Dr. D’Wayne Edwards reopened the school 
under its new name and established Pensole 
as a pipeline Historically Black College and 
University (HBCU) for career education and 
professional development in the product 
creation industry. The college is Michigan’s 
first and only HBCU and is the first designfocused HBCU in the U.S. 
City Highlight: Memphis
Memphis is home to NIKE’s North America 
Logistics Campus and represents our 
second-largest employee population in the 
U.S., after NIKE’s WHQ. In FY22, we proudly 
made investments that supported nonprofit 
organizations serving kids and communities 
across the city. These efforts benefited local 
schools, youth sport organizations and the 
National Civil Rights Museum.
OUR BLACK 
COMMUNITY 
COMMITMENT 
In 2020, NIKE, Converse, Jordan Brand and 
Michael Jordan committed a combined 
$140 million over 10 years for investment in 
and support of organizations addressing 
racial inequity for Black Americans. As part 
of this commitment, NIKE, Inc. will invest 
$40 million over four years with a focus 
on economic empowerment, education 
innovation and social justice reform. Jordan 
Brand and Michael Jordan will invest $100 
million over 10 years supporting the pillars 
of economic justice, education, narrative 
change, and social justice. 
This unique commitment taps into the power 
of three iconic brands within the NIKE, 
Inc. portfolio to address systemic racism 
in distinct approaches designed to drive 
greater collective impact. 
For FY22, as part of the $15 million total 
contribution to the Black Community 
Commitment, NIKE invested $10 million 
to support 11 national organizations, 
including new grantees: four in the education 
innovation space (namely, Pensole Lewis 
College of Business and Design, Son of 
a Saint, All Star Code and Big Brothers 
Big Sisters of America) and the Equal 
Justice Initiative, which prioritizes social 
justice reform.
WNBA athlete, 
Kia Nurse
Jordan BCC
In FY22, within the $15M BCC investment, 
Jordan Brand granted $5 million to 
community organizations. These 
investments were amplified by a personal 
donation of $5 million by Michael Jordan (not 
included in the total for this target) to deliver 
$10M collectively between Jordan Brand 
and Michael Jordan.
These FY22 investments reach across 
the spaces of Institutional Grants (macrolevel organizations with national reach), 
Community Grants at the grassroots level, 
and Jordan Family Grants (in partnership 
with Jordan Family athletes and influencers)
New Jordan BCC Institutional Grant partners 
were welcomed into the initiative such as: 
− Next Gen Personal Finance expanded 
its financial literacy curriculum to 498,000 
students and 639 high schools across 
the U.S.
− The YWCA of Metropolitan Chicago 
TechGYRLS program provided access 
to opportunities in STEM for 200 girls in 
local communities. 
− The Hidden Genius Project trains 
and mentors Black male youth with 
technology education, entrepreneurship 
and leadership skills. 
− Management Leadership for Tomorrow 
accelerates career pathways to excellence 
and changes employer practices. 
− The Center for Black Educator 
Development increases the number 
of Black educators and creates healthy, 
supportive publicschool environments 
for Black students who need it most. 
Rounding out the Jordan BCC investments 
were 24 new community grantees in FY22 
across nearly 20 U.S. cities, in addition 
to a number of new Jordan Family Grant 
organizations. From the Jayson Tatum 
Foundation, 100 Black Men of Metropolitan 
St. Louis, the Nigel Sylvester Foundation and 
Black Mother’s Forum (nominated by WNBA 
athlete, Kia Nurse) – Jordan Community and 
Family Grants continued to drive sustainable 
change at the local level. 
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
145 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Converse
Converse is proud to make inclusive 
progress in its headquarters city of Boston, 
donating nearly $1 million in FY22 to serve 
Black communities through a robust 
community partner portfolio focused on 
positive youth development. We partner 
with the American Civil Liberties Union 
of Massachusetts, Citizens for Juvenile 
Justice, Roca Inc., Youth Guidance and 
InnerCity Weightlifting (ICW). Our efforts help 
to reimagine youth justice in Massachusetts 
and increase access to opportunity for youth 
from historically excluded communities. 
Converse drives grassroots impact by 
working together with employee resource 
groups and employees to develop authentic 
strategies that are informed by local needs. 
In FY22, Converse began to co-create 
development programs alongside 
community partners, such as The Possible 
Zone’s Apparel Intensive, a tuition-free 
program that brings high school students 
from under-resourced communities through 
Converse’s apparel process – from design 
to development to marketing – to drive 
awareness and real-life experience around 
the types of careers that are possible within 
the industry. The program was facilitated 
by 18 Converse employees who worked 
with passion and pride to deliver a bespoke 
experience for these students.
Partner Highlight: InnerCity Weighlifting 
Our partnership with ICW demonstrates 
how these efforts help to drive meaningful 
change. ICW is a non-profit on a mission 
to amplify the voice and agency of people 
who have been most impacted by systemic 
racism and mass incarceration. In FY22, 
NIKE provided funding through our Black 
Community Commitment for ICW’s core 
programming as well as content-creation 
classes and equipment for their staff. In 
addition to the grant funding, Converse 
incorporated ICW into our return-to-work 
fitness activations. This programming 
allowed for ICW trainers to directly interact 
with Converse employees and build social 
capital, a proven model for disrupting current 
systems of segregation, isolation 
and racism. 
“It [the Black Community Commitment 
grant] and our partnership with NIKE and 
Converse not only bring in resources 
and opportunity to our organization, they 
broaden our community. They broaden what 
is possible, all while helping to remove the 
blame of an individual, and instead putting 
an appropriate focus on the environment,” 
says Jon Feinman, Executive Director and 
Founder at ICW. “The financial support and 
brand support amplify the community at 
ICW. They energize and motivate us. They 
make us know that we are in this together. 
That we have partners to lean on, who 
expand the impact that happens at ICW 
beyond our immediate reach.”
Play Inclusive Community
 “Our partnership with 
NIKE and Converse not 
only brings in resources 
and opportunity to our 
organization, it broadens 
our community.”
–Jon Feinman
Executive Director and Founder 
at InnerCity Weightlifting
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
146 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Inclusive Community
INCLUSIVE 
COMMUNITY 
INVESTMENTS
Alongside BCC, NIKE is proud to invest 
$18 million in grants that drive an inclusive 
community for all. In FY22, our support 
expanded to include nonprofits outside the 
U.S., dedicated to creating a better and more 
equitable future for historically marginalized 
communities across EMEA and APLA. 
In EMEA, we’re supporting organizations 
that are advancing equality through four 
dimensions of diversity: race and ethnicity, 
LGBTQIA+, gender and disability. As an 
example of the many organizations driving 
unparalleled work in creating a more 
inclusive community, we support Londonbased organizations Disability Sports 
Coach, Not A Phase and Sporting Equals. 
In FY22, NIKE also provided platforms 
for partners to have solution-based 
conversations with one another and direct 
access to leaders across the NIKE business. 
Through two virtual summits – Black & 
Boundless and Heritage Heroes – we 
gathered a total of more than 50 partners 
for inspiring conversations and innovative 
workshops, and provided new tools and 
resources designed to empower and 
celebrate NIKE’s community of changemakers, partners and NIKE employees.
 “I view it as a responsibility to myself 
and my community to contribute to 
a more equal and just society, and 
this includes my role at NIKE. I have 
the honor of working with nonprofit 
partners to remove barriers to economic 
empowerment, create access to 
education, and elevate opportunities to 
create the next generation of leaders and 
build capacity to fight social injustice.”
Felicia Wasson
Director of Social & 
Community Impact, 
Inclusive Community 
Portfolio
People Profile
London-based 
organization, Not A 
Phase helps uplift the 
trans community.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
147 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
50 years ago, NIKE was founded by a coach 
and an athlete. That legacy has shaped our 
company today and inspires the future we’re 
creating. There’s a coach in all of us – and 
throughout the year, we gave our employees 
around the world the opportunity to tap 
into the power of coaching and share their 
passion for sport with the next generation. 
As employees returned to the workplace 
at the end of the fiscal year, giving them 
opportunities to impact their communities 
was the perfect way to welcome them back 
and celebrate NIKE’s culture of community.
Increase the number of employees 
engaged in their communities 
to a minimum of 35%
Quantitative Target
Play Employee Engagement
% of employees engaged 
in their community
FY21 FY22
35% 35%
2025 Target
35%
We hosted an Appreciation Day in our offices 
around the world to inspire employees to 
give back to their communities through 
coaching. At our WHQ in Oregon, four-time 
Olympic gold medalist Sanya RichardsRoss and Coaching Peace founder Diana 
Cutaia co-hosted a day full of coaching 
conversations with NIKE and Jordan Brand 
athletes and fun and inclusive play and sport 
activities. We invited more than 35 nonprofit 
partners from the Portland metro area to 
connect with employees about volunteer 
and coaching opportunities. Around the 
world, we provided thousands of employees 
with coach trainings as well as virtual and 
in-person volunteer opportunities to put 
their learnings into practice with community 
partner organizations.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
148 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Employee Engagement
For the fifth year in a row, we celebrated 
Giving Tuesday by encouraging employees 
around the world to give – with the Nike 
Foundation offering a double match for all 
employee donations made on the Give Your 
Best platform. More than 2,600 employees 
directed $10 million to 2,275 organizations, 
which was a 43% increase in giving from the 
previous year. 
To help employees across China donate 
on Giving Tuesday – and beyond – our 
NIKE Greater China team launched an 
industry-leading, China-specific extension 
of our global Give Your Best platform to 
help activate the annual day of giving for 
employees there. As a unique offering 
by a global company, this NIKE platform 
created by, and for, our local Greater China 
teammates, with special consideration 
to local regulations, enables mainland 
China employees to donate and connect 
with volunteer opportunities in their 
local communities.
Appreciation Day 
at NIKE WHQ 
Our employee giving platform, Give Your 
Best, continues to serve as the strongest 
measure of our employees’ engagement 
in their communities. In FY22, amid the 
COVID-19 pandemic and community 
lockdowns, 35% of our global employee 
population engaged with Give Your Best 
to help deliver NIKE’s Purpose. More than 
7,000 NIKE employees gave to nearly 
4,000 organizations around the world. 
Employees directed $20 million with the 
Nike Foundation’s employee-matching gift 
program to support the causes, nonprofits 
and schools they care about most. More 
than 2,200 employees from 28 different 
countries volunteered, largely through 
virtual programming, over 62,000 hours in 
their communities, earning reward dollars 
that employees can give to the nonprofit 
of their choice. Employees in Laakdal, 
Belgium, home to our European Logistics 
Campus, were among our most active 
volunteers, committing nearly 6,000 hours 
to their communities. 
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
149 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Play Employee Engagement
A key enabler of our commitment to 
coaching and helping all kids achieve 
their full potential, the NIKE Community 
Ambassador (NCA) program empowers 
NIKE retail store employees to volunteer 
with kids on a consistent basis as coaches 
in their local communities. NCAs bring to 
life fun and informed coaching strategies 
to create an inclusive environment for all 
kids, inspiring them to be active for life, 
because an active generation means a 
more equitable and better future. Since 
FY16, more than 14,500 NCAs from nearly 
900 different stores in 648 cities around 
the world have volunteered to coach kids 
in their communities, resulting in more than 
270,000 volunteer hours. 
The NCA program also serves as a 
pathway for leadership development and 
career growth. By becoming an NCA, 
retail store employees learn critical and 
transferable in-store and out-of-store skills, 
including communicating with vision and 
purpose, fostering effective teamwork, 
valuing differences, thinking strategically 
and building trust across teammates, 
leaders and partners. The leadership skills 
they acquire through the program better 
prepare them for elevated roles within our 
stores or offices. 
In FY22, as the COVID-19 pandemic 
persisted and school and community 
programs remained closed, NCA 
in-person volunteer opportunities were 
also suspended to focus on the health of 
our employees and community members. 
To continue a spirit of volunteering, the 
NCA program pivoted to enhanced virtual 
training offerings and placed an emphasis 
on NCA leadership development. Plans 
were made to expand the number of 
Elevated Community Champions in FY23, 
a role created in FY20 that is responsible 
for building relationships with community 
partners and store leadership and leading 
program communication.
The NIKE Community Impact Fund (NCIF) 
is our employee-led grant-making program 
that supports organizations creating active 
communities and providing access to play 
and sport. NCIF empowers employees in the 
U.S., Canada, Europe and Japan to bring 
their purposes to life in their communities 
by involving them in the grant-selection 
process. This employee-led, neighborhoodfocused approach allows us to support local, 
grassroots organizations that are driving 
positive, lasting change and to make play 
possible for all kids and the community. 
In FY22, the NCIF program included store 
NIKE Community 
Ambassador 
Coaches
athletes in the grant selection process, 
inviting them to vote on the organizations 
selected, with more than 241 retail store 
employees across the U.S. engaged. 
Additionally, the program expanded to 
Berlin and Tokyo. In FY22, we provided 
$1.5 million in grants to support active, 
inclusive, community-based initiatives 
with more than 160 local organizations.
Launched in 2015, the Jordan Wings 
program provides access to opportunity 
to global youth, serving communities 
across the U.S., China, and France in 
FY22. In China, youth in undeveloped 
areas were supported by pairing them 
with employees who served as program 
mentors. In total, the program has 
supported more than 2,800 high school 
youth through 511 employee mentors – 
65% of whom were female – dedicating 
more than 110,000 volunteer hours to the 
program. In FY22, as we celebrated the 25th 
anniversary of the Jordan Brand in China, 
the Jordan Wings program innovated to 
new heights, launching the Jordan Wings 
summer internship program, which provides 
outstanding graduates with internship 
opportunities within the Jordan Brand team.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
150 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Converse’s youth engagement model 
is designed to encourage meaningful 
engagement between employees and 
our community partners through skillsbased volunteering, team volunteering and 
networking. In FY22, Converse employees 
volunteered more than 950 hours, including 
one-of-a-kind creative opportunities for 
youth, like the design and development 
of the 2022 All-Star Weekend Celebrity 
Game jerseys. 
Young creatives like Sofia Liashcheva 
and Andre Weiss were invited from the 
Las Fotos Project and Boston’s Institute 
of Contemporary Art to capture the entire 
creative process. To help design the East 
team uniforms, self-taught artist Abel 
Teclemariam, an 18-year-old member of 
Converse community partner The Possible 
Zone, drew inspiration from street art and 
murals all around the East Coast. Thirteen 
year-old Boyle Heights Arts Conservatory 
member Nestor “Lil Nes” Hernandez created 
the West team jersey’s design, which paid 
homage to the 1990s, basketball and the 
NBA’s 75th anniversary.
Play Employee Engagement
“Lil Nes” 
Hernandez 
designing the 
2022 All-Star 
Weekend Celebrity 
Game jersey for 
the West team.
Athlete Services Coach and NIKE Community Ambassador, 
San Jose, California, USA
SPEND A DAY WITH:
 JESSICA SANTIAGO
“You can use your own personal experience to 
engage with kids. You don’t have to put on a 
facade. If you can be your true self with confidence, 
it shows kids they can, too.”
Play Coaching Diaries
151 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Getting going
Routine is really important for me because it 
impacts the rest of your day. Every morning, I start 
with a small walk around the block with my puppy, 
“Little Guy,” followed by a cup of coffee and a 
breakfast sandwich. This helps to center me as 
I commute to work. 
I always arrive to work 10–15 minutes prior to my 
start time to get myself ready for the business day. 
By showing up early, I can spend time with my 
team and check in with everyone on a personal 
level. Acknowledging everyone by name and 
building connections is a part of my job that I 
thoroughly enjoy. I’ve been told you can hear 
my laugh from the other side of the building.
Always growing
Once I’ve checked in with my team and ensured 
everyone knows their priorities for the day, I work 
on creating a daily and weekly checklist. The 
checklist may range from scheduling a community 
practice, onboarding new hires, completing a 
sales forecast or individual conversations with 
athletes. I make sure to set time aside with my 
assistant head coach(es), too.
Face to face
When we return from a volunteering experience 
we’re always excited to share the energy with 
teammates back at the store. It’s just one way 
we are so much more than “just a retail store.”
In my time working at NIKE, I’ve come to 
know customers as friends. A father and his 
daughter have been visiting NIKE since she was 
12. She’s now 18 and I have loved hearing about 
her successes over the years, in school and 
softball. I’ve also become close with a Physical 
Education teacher. As a coach, I love hearing 
about her programs and how she helps keep 
kids engaged with sports, and that also helps 
me find what she needs as a customer. 
Coaching
The East Valley YMCA where our NCA team 
volunteers is a local organization we have 
partnered with for three sport seasons. As a NCA 
District Champion, I participate in trainings with 
NIKE’s Social & Community Impact team and the 
Center for Healing and Justice though Sport. 
These trainings have helped me to share with our 
athletes the importance of proper volunteer 
etiquette through digital training modules, and 
also help guide them during bi-monthly district 
calls. All of this helps us to form long-term 
relationships with the kids we coach. 
A standout experience for me was coaching the 
flag football team with The Boys & Girls Club. 
There were 12 girls in the team, all super excited 
to compete. We went onto the field confident and 
united as a team. And we won! It taught these girls 
that they’re fully capable of anything they put their 
minds to. That girls are winners. That’s something 
I’ll pass on to every athlete I talk to. 
After hours
As a NIKE Community Ambassador, we 
communicate the importance of consistency and 
celebration every day. I take this mindset into my 
daily life. I used to compete on several urban hip 
hop teams in the Bay Area. Now I have a strong 
habit of daily movement by going to the gym. 
Exercising doesn’t just better my state of mind, it 
makes me happy. Even if it’s just 10 minutes, it 
keeps me accountable. As a NIKE Community 
Ambassador, we tell the kids we coach the same 
thing: consistency is everything. 
Time to talk
Whether I’m working on the floor or in the office, 
my team knows they can always pull me aside for 
a chat. A good leader has to start from a place of 
empathy and understanding, and I work hard to 
demonstrate to my team the ways I can support 
them. I can ask, “Are you feeling overwhelmed?” 
and offer to cover their zone so they can take a 
break. Or “Do you need to pick up your kids from 
school?” and schedule a touchbase to discuss an 
accommodation we can work into the system. We 
also have NIKE resources we can utilize such as 
Lyra, which provides mental health support for 
employees. That was especially useful during the 
first years of the pandemic, when so many people 
were feeling overwhelmed. 
Play Coaching Diaries
Jessica Santiago knows the importance of 
showing up as a coach.
“You know the girl who’s too scared to play? 
She’ll notice that you keep coming back, that you 
remember her name and that you know how far 
she jumped last week. When kids feel seen, they 
thrive.” 
Before joining NIKE, Jessica worked as a 
childcare director at her local YMCA. Putting 
her background in developmental psychology to 
practical use, she brought play, movement and 
creativity to kids. In the nine years since joining 
NIKE, Jessica has worked her way up from a 
seasonal employee to her role today as an Athlete 
Services Coach at her store in Milpitas, California. 
Her leadership is grounded in understanding her 
team’s needs because she’s been in their shoes. 
In 2015, Jessica became a NIKE Community 
Ambassador (NCA). NCAs like Jessica volunteer 
as a coach in their local community – globally, 
more than 6,700 store employees have served as 
volunteer youth coaches. 
For Jessica, the NCA program is a full-circle 
experience. She’s back to volunteering at the 
YMCA, where she and other NCAs spend 
five hours a week coaching kids. When she 
coaches, she brings her personal experience
and knowledge, helping to level the playing field 
for all.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
152 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
153 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
In FY22, Nike invested $149.4 million, which 
represented 2.24% of the prior year’s pre-tax 
income – exceeding our 2025 target of 2% 
investment. Given the long impact of COVID19 and increasing needs from communities 
around the world, this represented NIKE’s 
largest annual community investment 
to date. 
At NIKE, our commitment to women and girls 
runs deep. It encompasses our global key 
cities and employee backyards. Since 2008, 
the Nike Foundation has supported the 
Girl Effect – and FY22 was no exception. 
The Girl Effect is a movement that continues 
to enable the unique potential of adolescent 
girls to end poverty for themselves, their 
families, their communities, their countries 
and the world. It aims to make girls visible 
and change their social and economic 
environment by equipping them with 
specific, powerful and relevant resources.
Invest 2% of prior-year pre-tax 
income to drive positive impact 
in communities
Quantitative Target
Play Community Investment
% of prior-year pre-tax 
income invested
FY21
4%
FY22
3.4% 2.2%
2025 Target
2%
In FY22, NIKE supported more diverse 
communities than ever before, through 
partnerships committed to supporting 
girls and women from Black and brown 
communities beginning in North America 
and across our EMEA and APLA 
geographies. We brought the full breadth 
of NIKE’s support to the communities most 
in need. A few examples that underscore 
our commitment include NIKE’s $4 
million investment in The Asian American 
Foundation and our ongoing support 
of HBCUs.
To help us create long-term, strategic 
impact, we evolved our grant-making 
process by providing more multi-year 
grants to leading organizations. Our aim 
is to increase the number of larger multiyear grants in the future, as we know that 
sustained social and community impact 
extends beyond 12-month horizons.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
154 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
NIKE also responds to unforeseen events 
that significantly impact communities 
around the world. In FY22, NIKE and the 
Nike Foundation provided more than 
$4.6 million toward disaster response efforts. 
This included wildfire and hurricane relief in 
the U.S., flooding in the Henan province of 
China and our response efforts to support 
displaced citizens of Ukraine.
To further support our communities, 
NIKE donated 276,000 units of product 
to schools and community organizations. 
These products benefit the community and 
help remove barriers to product that youth 
face when it comes to accessing play and 
sport opportunities. 
For Jordan Brand, FY22 was defined 
by continuing to create pathways to 
excellence and equity through its signature 
Jordan Wings program, and its ongoing 
commitment to the Black community. In 
addition to the deepened investments made 
through these spaces, through the growth 
of the Jordan Wings program, Jordan 
Brand also ushered in a new era for access 
in design education within key homes for 
basketball culture. 
In Paris, the Jordan Wings Design Program 
started its work with three key community 
partners – Prométhée Education, Le BAL’s / 
Fabrique du Regard and Casa93, while the 
U.S.-based end of the program paired Fuel 
Up to Play 60 students with NFL athletes to 
give them the opportunity to design custom 
performance footwear for players. 
Play Community Investment
For FY22 – and across its Purpose-led 
investments – this resulted in Jordan 
Brand serving communities through a 
network of more than 80 global community 
partners and nearly $13 million in total 
program support.
FY22 for Converse signified serving more 
than 7,000 youth – 60% of whom identified 
as female or gender non-conforming. In 
addition, Converse’s charitable contributions 
grew by 77% over the prior fiscal year and 
contributed to the expansion of its portfolio 
of community impact partners leveraging 
creativity and arts programming to drive 
positive youth development in Boston and 
Los Angeles. Throughout the year, Converse 
invested in programs supporting youth 
through art exploration and development. 
These programs included Artists for 
Humanity, Boyle Heights Arts Conservatory, 
Inner-City Arts, Las Fotos Project, 
OrigiNation, Zumix and the teen programs 
at the Institute of Contemporary Art Boston 
and Museum of Fine Arts Boston.
Nigel Sylvester 
Foundation
05
OUR REPORTING 
APPROACH
155 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
156
 Reporting Methodology
157
 Issue Prioritization
161
Governance
162
 Risk Management
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
156 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
REPORTING 
METHODOLOGY
This report has been prepared by NIKE 
management under the oversight of the 
Corporate Responsibility, Sustainability 
& Governance Committee of the NIKE, Inc. 
Board of Directors. This report, our FY22 
SASB Summary document and all NIKE’s 
historical Impact Reports are available at 
about.nike.com/en/impact. This report 
has been prepared in accordance with the 
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards.
When we reference NIKE, Inc., unless 
otherwise stated, we are referencing our 
portfolio of brands including the NIKE Brand, 
Jordan Brand and Converse. This report 
covers NIKE’s fiscal year 2022 (June 1, 2021 
through May 31, 2022). 
Our Reporting Approach Reporting Methodology
LA Garage 
NIKE WHQ
We will refer to the fiscal year as FY22 and 
the calendar year as CY22 in the report. 
Unless otherwise stated, the baseline for 
our 2025 targets is FY20. Building on NIKE’s 
reporting tradition since 2002, we expect to 
continue reporting annual progress toward 
our social and environmental targets and 
priority issues. 
We have obtained external assurance on 
select reported metrics, including energy 
consumption and renewable electricity use 
in owned or operated facilities; Scope 1 
and 2 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions; a 
subset of Scope 3 GHG emissions including 
commercial air travel, inbound logistics and 
outbound logistics; and cumulative water 
restoration funding. More information can 
be found in the Appendix. 
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
157 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Each year, we update the results of our 
issue prioritization by gathering direct and 
indirect insights from key stakeholders, 
integrating internal metrics, benchmarking 
key companies, monitoring regulations 
and performing news and media scans to 
determine the most relevant issues for our 
company and the impacts most directly 
linked to those issues. 
We worked with Datamaran, an organization 
that identifies and monitors ESG risks and 
opportunities on an ongoing basis – by 
scanning regulatory, media and corporate 
disclosure environments. As in the previous 
assessment, we commissioned GlobeScan 
– an independent insights and advisory 
company – to conduct the overall analysis 
of our issue prioritization. 
We assess priority issues in two ways: 
1 By assessing the issues where 
NIKE has the potential to impact the 
environment and society (outward 
impacts), seen on the Y axis 
2 By assessing issues that could impact 
NIKE’s business and financial success 
(inward impacts), seen on the X axis.
Together, these views help determine which 
issues are essential for NIKE to address and 
strategize around in order to minimize risk 
and make the most progress toward positive 
change. Note that all of the issues identified 
on the matrix are considered important to 
NIKE. The top 16 issues in the upper right of 
the matrix are considered essential priorities. 
We know that many, if not all, of these issues 
are interconnected, with management of 
our top issues being dependent on how we 
manage other issues identified on the matrix.
Changes in FY22 from FY21 include one new 
issue in Transparency and Reporting, and an 
updated definition for Business Resilience. 
Please see the table below for our 32 Priority 
Issues and corresponding definitions.
Our Reporting Approach Issue Prioritization
Reflecting Pool at 
NIKE WHQ
At NIKE, we’ll never stop striving for better 
– whether it’s understanding the issues 
we impact, the change we can lead or 
the future we shape – together. 
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
14
4
13
Tier 3 Tier 2
Tier1
158 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Our Reporting Approach Issue Prioritization
Overall Issues Prioritization Matrix 2022 Environmental/Social Impact
Business Impact
Tier 1
1. Forced Labor
2. GHG Emissions
3. Labor Rights in the Supply Chain
4. Supply Chain Management and Transparency
5. Employee Health and Safety
6. Employee Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
7. Health and Safety in the Supply Chain
8. Product Design and Circularity
9. Water Use and Replenishment
10. Transparency and Reporting
11. Business Resilience
12. Employee Engagement and Well-being
13. Ethical Business Practices
14. Renewable Energy and Use
15. Materials Sourcing
16. Data Privacy and Protection
Tier 2
17. Promotion of Social Inclusion
18. Material Waste
19. Air and Water Pollution
20. Workforce Development in the Supply Chain
21. Biodiversity and Land Use
22. Employee Development
23. Consumer Transparency and Safety
24. Responsible Use of Innovation and Technology
25. Brand Value Alignment
26. Healthy Lifestyles
27. Chemicals Management
Tier 3
28. Inclusive Products and Services
29. Advocacy and Public Policy Practices
30. Community Impact
31. Indirect Supplier Diversity
32. Environmentally Friendly Workplaces and Practices
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
159 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Issue Name Issue Definition
Advocacy & public 
policy practices
Support or advance public policy that aligns with NIKE’s commitments on 
environmental, social, and economic issues.
Air & water pollution Pollutants to air and water from NIKE’s operations, products and services, and 
supply chain.
Biodiversity & land use Impacts to biodiversity and ecosystems, through transformation of habitats, land use, 
and other business activities.
Brand value alignment Corporate activities, including sponsorship and partnerships, that align to NIKE’s values 
on environmental, social and economic issues.
Business Resilience Promoting solutions and managing disruptions and impacts on the value chain 
associated with climate change, public health, natural disasters, conflict, political 
impacts, and other impacts.
Chemicals management Chemicals used in making materials, products and substances released to the 
environment (air and water) that may be harmful or toxic to humans and ecosystems.
Community impact Sustained community impact in primary markets and sourcing backyards; philanthropic 
efforts; employee involvement and volunteering in communities.
Consumer transparency 
& safety
Disclosures to customers and users about products and services; including 
safeguarding consumer health and safety when using products and reducing risk 
of injury.
Data privacy & protection Safeguard privacy & personal data of customers, employees, and business partners.
Employee development Attracting and retaining talent; offering training and development for employees to build 
capability and career opportunities.
Employee diversity, equity 
& inclusion
Fairness of treatment and compensation across all levels of the business; representation 
of female and minority employees in workforce, management & board.
Employee engagement & 
well-being
The ability for NIKE employees to be heard, present, focused, and energized, while 
feeling connected to NIKE’s Purpose; workplace wellness and engagement initiatives; 
ensuring a positive workplace culture.
Employee health & safety NIKE employee health and safety practices in its’ operations.
Our Reporting Approach Priority Issues and Definitions
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
160 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Issue Name Issue Definition
Material waste Waste generated throughout NIKE’s value chain; activities to reduce, reuse or recycle 
and responsibly manage/dispose of waste.
Materials sourcing Choice of non-renewable and renewable materials; consideration of social and 
environmental impacts associated with the types of materials used and the source; 
prioritizing less impactful options and third-party certifications.
Product design & circularity Designing products, packaging, and processes for durability, reuse, recycling and circularity.
Promotion of social inclusion Creating equitable playing fields and breaking down societal barriers for all athletes; 
diverse athlete endorsements; increase access to sport.
Renewables & energy use Energy used for electricity; use of fossil fuels and renewable energy sources.
Responsible use of 
innovation & technology
Promoting responsible and safe use of technology to create new and modified products, 
packaging and ways of conducting business; considering the impacts of automation.
Supply chain management 
& transparency
Transparent processes and systems to help ensure suppliers uphold standards on 
environmental, social, and ethical business practice issues.
Transparency and Reporting Implementing policies and practices to manage and measure environmental and social 
impacts; Oversight and accountability for managing ESG risk; Publicly reporting on 
sustainability/ESG-related issues, risks, opportunities, and outcomes as well as how 
they are managed and addressed by the business.
Water use & replenishment Water consumed throughout NIKE’s value chain; monitoring and/or mitigating our 
impacts in water scarce regions.
Workforce development in 
the supply chain
Building the capacity throughout NIKE’s supply chain for workers to receive training and 
development to build capability and career opportunities.
Our Reporting Approach Priority Issues and Definitions
Issue Name Issue Definition
Environmentally friendly 
workplaces & practices
Impacts on the environment and local communities of Nike’s buildings and 
workplace practices.
Ethical business practices Ethical and transparent corporate behavior by combatting dishonest or fraudulent 
conduct by those in power, typically involving bribery, corruption and intellectual 
property infringement.
Forced labor Operations and suppliers identified as having significant risk for incidents of forced or 
compulsory labor.
GHG emissions Greenhouse gas emissions in material sourcing, manufacturing, transportation and 
other business activities.
Health and safety in 
the supply chain
Worker health and safety practices throughout the supply chain.
Healthy lifestyles Promoting healthy habits, play and sport in kids and adults; risks to consumer base 
associated with the spread of obesity and inactive lifestyles.
Inclusive products & services Design products, services and marketing that are widely inclusive of and reflect the wide 
diversity of the consumer base.
Indirect supplier diversity Focus on sourcing goods and services that enable NIKE to maintain and develop its 
corporate/non-manufacturing operations with diverse (i.e. ethnic/racial minority, women, 
disabled, LGBTQ, and veteran) suppliers – ones that are majority owned, operated, 
managed, and controlled by a person or persons from diverse backgrounds.
Labor rights in the supply chain Protection and monitoring of the labor rights of workers in NIKE’s supply chain 
(operations and manufacturing), including the right to freedom of association and 
collective bargaining, child labor, and other labor rights.
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
161 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Our Reporting Approach Governance
GOVERNANCE
NIKE’s commitment to Purpose begins 
at the highest level with our Board of 
Directors (Board). The Board oversees 
our Purpose work primarily through the 
Corporate Responsibility, Sustainability 
& Governance Committee (CRS&G 
Committee). As specified in its charter, the 
CRS&G Committee reviews and provides 
guidance with respect to NIKE’s corporate 
Purpose, including corporate responsibility, 
sustainability, human rights, global 
community and social impact, and diversity, 
equity and inclusion. 
The CRS&G Committee oversees both the 
risks and the opportunities associated with 
Purpose. Specifically, this includes reviewing 
significant Purpose strategies, activities, 
policies, investments and programs; 
monitoring the development of, and progress 
toward, our Purpose targets; and providing 
guidance regarding Purpose reporting. 
To carry out its responsibilities, the CRS&G 
Committee receives regular updates 
from management regarding our Purpose 
work, including: 
− At each regularly scheduled CRS&G 
Committee meeting, progress reports 
regarding the 2025 targets 
− Regular presentations on each of the three 
Purpose pillars – People, Planet and Play – 
from the respective management leader 
− Annual presentations on Purpose strategy 
and reporting 
At each Board meeting, the CRS&G 
Committee reports to the Board on 
Purpose highlights and key developments. 
The Compensation Committee also 
plays a significant role in the People pillar 
by overseeing talent management and 
development for executive officers and 
senior management, including with respect 
to employee engagement and workplace 
diversity and inclusion.
Purpose Management 
Purpose leadership begins with our 
Chief Executive Officer and Executive 
Leadership Team, who set the tone 
and ensure it is integrated into NIKE’s 
business strategy. Cross-functional teams 
support this integrated approach while 
dedicated functional leadership drives 
the day-to-day work.
Corporate Responsibility, 
Sustainability & Governance 
(CRS&G) Committee
Diversity, Equity and 
Inclusion (DEI)
Audit and Finance 
Committee
Supply Chain Labor, 
Health and Safety
Social and Community 
Investment
Compensation 
Committee
Environment
Board
Executive Leadership Team
Purpose Leadership Team
Purpose Subcommittee
Introduction Appendix
Target Progression
People
Planet
162 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Our Reporting Approach Risk Management
RISK MANAGEMENT
NIKE Global Risk Management (GRM) is 
an independent and objective internal audit 
and risk organization that is guided by a 
philosophy of enhancing and protecting 
NIKE, Inc.’s value and brand through 
world-class risk management capabilities. 
It assists NIKE, Inc. in accomplishing its 
objectives by partnering with management 
to build and maintain effective risk 
management, control and governance 
processes. GRM reports to the Chief 
Financial Officer and is over seen by 
the Audit & Finance Committee. 
GRM identifies and evaluates risks to NIKE, 
Inc., including those related to Purpose, 
as part of its risk assessment process. 
This process then informs GRM’s audit 
and risk plan and how GRM deploys risk 
management services across NIKE, Inc. 
Regular risk updates and insights are 
provided to management and the Audit 
& Finance Committee.
NYC Garage 
NIKE WHQ
164
 Data Tables
195
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) 
Index
215
 Assurance Report
216
 NIKE, Inc. 
Management Assertion
06
163
APPENDIX
FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
Appendix
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
164 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
PEOPLE60
Appendix Data Tables
Target
50% representation of women 
in global corporate workforce 
and 45% in leadership positions
NIKE, Inc. Totals By Gender (global/corporate)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22 FY25 Target
Gender # % # % # p.p. %
All employees
Female 11,606 50.4% 12,833 51.1% 1,227 0.6 p.p 50%
Male 11,409 49.6% 12,305 48.9% 896 -0.6 p.p
Total 23,015 100% 25,138 100% 2,123 0 p.p.
Leadership positions
Female 166 43.0% 189 44.1% 23 1.1 p.p 45%
Male 220 57.0% 240 55.9% 20 -1.1 p.p
Total 386 100% 429 100% 43 0 p.p.
NIKE, Inc. Women Totals (global/all lines of business)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
All Bands # % # % # p.p.
NIKE, Inc. 32,584 49.9% 35,574 49.8% 2,990 -0.1 p.p.
VPLT 166 42.8% 190 43.9% 24 1.1 p.p.
Sr. Director 551 42.9% 628 44.1% 77 1.3 p.p.
Director 2,066 43.5% 2,267 43.9% 201 0.5 p.p.
Managers 5,244 45.9% 6,064 47.1% 820 1.2 p.p.
Entry Level 24,557 51.8% 26,425 51.3% 1,868 -0.5 p.p.
60 Employee representation metrics in this report regarding race/ethnicity characteristics are based on voluntary employee 
self-identification or, in conformance with EEO-1 data collection guidance, these employees have been identified using 
commonly accepted HR practices as “Not Hispanic/Latino,” “Two or More Races,” “or Unknown.”
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
165 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Target
30% representation of U.S. racial 
and ethnic minorities (REM) at 
Director level and above; increase 
pipeline of Black and Latinx talent 
at Director and above
NIKE, Inc. Totals by REM Group (U.S. Only, corporate, E+)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22 FY25 Target
Director+ # % # % # p.p. %
Non-REM 3,108 69.5% 3,213 65.5% 105 -4.0 p.p.
REM 1,365 30.5% 1,691 34.5% 326 4.0 p.p. 30%
Total 4,473 100% 4,904 100% 431 0 p.p.
American Indian or Alaskan 
Native (Not Hispanic/Latino)
9 0.2% 14 0.3% 5 0.1 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 610 13.6% 760 15.5% 150 1.9 p.p.
Black or African American 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
256 5.7% 333 6.8% 77 1.1 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 285 6.4% 340 6.9% 55 0.6 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
9 0.2% 8 0.2% -1 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
196 4.4% 236 4.8% 40 0.4 p.p.
Unknown 35 0.8% 49 1.0% 14 0.2 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 3,073 68.7% 3,164 64.5% 91 -4.2 p.p.
Total 4,473 100% 4,904 100% 431 0 p.p.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
166 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
NIKE, Inc. Totals by REM (U.S./Corporate)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
VP+ # % # % # p.p.
Non-REM 221 69.7% 231 65.4% 10 -4.3 p.p.
REM 96 30.3% 122 34.6% 26 4.3 p.p.
Total 317 100% 353 100% 36 0 p.p.
American Indian or Alaskan 
Native (Not Hispanic/Latino)
0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 27 8.5% 39 11.0% 12 2.5 p.p.
Black or African American 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
45 14.2% 50 14.2% 5 0.0 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 15 4.7% 17 4.8% 2 0.1 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
9 2.8% 16 4.5% 7 1.7 p.p.
Unknown 2 0.6% 6 1.7% 4 1.1 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 219 69.1% 225 63.7% 6 -5.3 p.p.
Total 317 100% 353 100% 36 0 p.p.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
167 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
NIKE, Inc. Totals by REM Group (U.S. Only, All lines of Business, All Bands)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
All Bands # % # % # p.p.
Non-REM 13,098 40.3% 13,738 37.0% 640 -3.3 p.p.
REM 19,441 59.7% 23,416 63.0% 3,975 3.3 p.p.
Total 32,539 100% 37,154 100% 4,615 0 p.p.
American Indian or Alaskan 
Native (Not Hispanic/Latino)
123 0.4% 152 0.4% 29 0.0 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 3,230 9.9% 3,939 10.6% 709 0.7 p.p.
Black or African American 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
7,905 24.3% 9,487 25.5% 1,582 1.2 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 6,092 18.7% 7,427 20.0% 1,335 1.3 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
211 0.6% 259 0.7% 48 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
1,880 5.8% 2,152 5.8% 272 0.0 p.p.
Unknown 126 0.4% 437 1.2% 311 0.8 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 12,972 39.9% 13,301 35.8% 329 -4.1 p.p.
Total 32,539 100% 37,154 100% 4,615 0 p.p.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
168 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
NIKE, Inc. Totals by REM Group (U.S. Only, All Lines of Business, All Bands) by Band
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22
All Bands # % # % # p.p.
NIKE, Inc. 19,441 59.7% 23,416 63.0% 3,975 3.3 p.p.
VPLT 96 30.2% 122 34.3% 26 4.1 p.p.
Sr. Director 310 32.2% 368 34.1% 58 1.9 p.p.
Director 1,004 30.3% 1,249 34.7% 245 4.4 p.p.
Managers 2,509 36.7% 3,087 40.3% 578 3.6 p.p.
Entry Level 15,522 73.5% 18,590 76.0% 3,068 2.5 p.p.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
169 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Target
35% representation of racial 
and ethnic minorities in our 
U.S. corporate workforce
NIKE, Inc. Totals by REM Group (U.S. Only, Corporate, All Bands)
FY21 FY22
Change 
FY21–FY22 FY25 Target
All Bands # % # % # p.p. %
Non-REM 8,983 65.5% 9,237 61.2% 254 -4.3 p.p.
REM 4,728 34.5% 5,861 38.8% 1,133 4.3 p.p. 35%
Total 13,711 100% 15,098 100% 1,387 0 p.p.
American Indian or Alaskan 
Native (Not Hispanic/Latino)
48 0.4% 50 0.3% 2 0.0 p.p.
Asian (Not Hispanic/Latino) 2,073 15.1% 2,561 17.0% 488 1.8 p.p.
Black or African American 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
763 5.6% 1,062 7.0% 299 1.5 p.p.
Hispanic/Latino 976 7.1% 1,221 8.1% 245 1.0 p.p.
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
48 0.4% 53 0.4% 5 0.0 p.p.
Two or More Races 
(Not Hispanic/Latino)
820 6.0% 914 6.1% 94 0.1 p.p.
Unknown 77 0.6% 166 1.1% 89 0.5 p.p.
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 8,906 65.0% 9,071 60.1% 165 -4.9 p.p.
Total 13,711 100% 15,098 100% 1,387 0 p.p.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
170 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Board of Directors
FY20 FY21 FY22
# % # % # % 
Gender
Female 4 30.8 4 33.3 4 36.4
Male 9 69.2 8 66.7 7 63.6
Total 13 100 12 100 11 100
Race/Ethnicity
American Indian or 
Alaskan Native
0 0 0 0 0 0
Black or African American 4 30.8 3 25 3 27.3
Asian 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hispanic/Latino 0 0 0 0 0 0
Native Hawaiian or 
Other Pacific Islander
0 0 0 0 0 0
Two or More Races 0 0 0 0 0 0
Unkown 0 0 0 0 0 0
White 9 69.2 9 75 8 72.7
Total 13 100 12 100 11 100
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
171 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Target
100% of strategic suppliers are building 
world-class, safe and healthy workplaces 
for the people making our products
OH&S Data61 For NIKE Employees62 and Tier 1 Focus Factories63
NIKE Employees
CY20 CY2164 CY22
Distribution (Industry Code: 493110)
Total Case Incident Rate (TCIR) NIKE 1.17 0.96 1.05
Industry65 4.90 5.00 5.60
Lost Time Injury Rate (LTIR) NIKE 0.78 0.33 0.32
Industry 3.70 2.10 2.30
Air MI (Industry Code: 326113)66
TCIR NIKE 4.8167 4.70 3.17
Industry 4.70 2.70 3.30
LTIR NIKE 1.9367 1.71 1.58
Industry 3.20 1.10 1.20
Offices (Industry Code: 551114)
TCIR NIKE 0.35 0.01 0.04
Industry 0.70 0.70 0.60
LTIR NIKE 0.15 0.00 0.00
Industry 0.30 0.30 0.20
61 OH&S data is reported using calendar year (CY) instead of fiscal year (FY) to align data with regulatory reporting requirements, including Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), both of which are used as an industry standard. The industry average comes from the United States Department of Labor; BLS. Each industry 
classification, such as DCs and Air MI, offices, footwear manufacturing, apparel manufacturing, reports a separate average for recordable injuries and lost time rates each of which are captured and recorded separately.
62 The reported injury rates reflect a combination of NIKE full-time and certain external temporary workers. Data is collected based on U.S. legal reporting requirements, reporting on all NIKE’s operations except retail, which is excluded from OSHA record keeping requirements. Retail injury rates will be included in future reports.
63 Focus factories are key strategic contract factories within our supply chain that represent the majority of finished goods production of NIKE footwear, apparel and Converse footwear.
64 Using CY21 BLS rates as BLS rates for CY22 were not published at the time of the FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report publication.
65 The industry average comes from the United States Department of Labor; Bureau of Labor Statistics. Each industry classification (such as DC, Air Manufacturing Innovation (Air MI), Offices, Footwear Manufacturing, Apparel Manufacturing) reports a separate average for recordable injuries and lost time rates (which are captured).
66 The Air MI industry code has been updated as of CY22 reporting. After implementation of a manufacturing expansion and site diversification plan, the broader “All other plastics product manufacturing” category is now a more accurate description for Air MI’s business. Both “Unlaminated Plastics Film & Sheet Manufacturing” and “Unlaminated Plastics Profile Shape Manufacturing” 
occur at Air MI facilities.
67 FY20 Air MI injury rate was uniquely influenced by COVID-19 with interruptions in work, adjustments to manufacturing process and the addition of hundreds of temporary workers to augment the workforce
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
172 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Tier 1 Focus Factories68
CY20 CY2164 CY22
Footwear (Industry Code: 3162)
TCIR Supplier 0.28 0.15 0.11
Industry 3.20 3.40 6.50
LTIR Supplier 0.15 0.08 0.06
Industry 1.00 1.30 3.10
Apparel (Industry Code: 3152)
TCIR Supplier 0.50 0.52 0.25
Industry 1.90 1.60 1.80
LTIR Supplier 0.27 0.21 0.13
Industry 0.70 0.60 1.00
CY20 CY2164 CY22
Equipment
TCIR Supplier 0.37 − − 
Industry N/A N/A N/A
LTIR Supplier 0.37 − −
Industry N/A N/A N/A
68 Tier 1 focus factory data is self-reported by factories and may be incomplete. At the time of the FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report publication, December 2021 data was estimated for factories where 
actual data was unavailable. The BLS does not calculate manufacturing rates for equipment/accessories. From CY21 onwards through the FY25 target cycle, there are no accessories focus factories.
64 Using CY21 BLS rates as BLS rates for CY22 were not published at the time of the FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report publication.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
173 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Audit, Non-Compliance
% of Tier 1 Total % of Tier 2 Total % of DCs Total
Age Standards 0 0.2 0.5
Air Emissions 0 0.1 0
Building Is Safe 4.2 5.6 10
Chemical Management 30.4 20.1 7.2
Code is Fully Implemented 6.7 5.6 8.6
Discrimination 0.4 1.3 5.7
Dorms, Canteen and Childcare 2.1 2.1 1.4
Fire and Emergency Action 16.7 10.0 12
Forced or Compulsory Labor69 1.3 0.7 0.5
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining 1.7 1.4 6.7
Harassment and Abuse 0.8 0.0 0.0
Hazardous Waste 1.3 1.9 0.0
Occupational Health and Hygiene 9.2 13.3 11.5
Regular Employment 1.3 0.8 1.0
Solid Waste (Non-Hazardous Waste) 0 0.4 2.4
Wages and Benefits 3.3 5.4 2.9
Wastewater 3.8 2.7 0.0
Working Hours 4.6 10.6 17.2
Workplace Is Safe 12.5 17.7 12.4
Total 100 100 100
Target
100% of facilities in our extended supply chain 
meet NIKE’s foundational labor, health, safety 
and environmental standards demonstrating 
respect for the rights of their workers and 
communities where they operate
69 “All work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily.” – International Labour Organization
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
174 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Worker Count Results
Tier 1 Tier 2 DC’s FY22 Total
# # # # %
Americas 59,722 3,998 13,747 77,467 6
EMEA 32,428 846 3,066 36,340 3
N Asia 113,272 61,449 3,985 178,706 14
S Asia 380,730 31,079 394 412,203 32
SE Asia 541,811 57,260 49 599,120 46
Total 1,127,963 154,632 21,241 1,303,836
Audit Counts
Tier 1 Tier 2 DC’s FY22 Total
# # # # %
NIKE 61 1 0 62 4
SLCP40 286 158 26 470 33
SAC’s FEM40 379 185 0 564 40
ZDHC40 Wastewater Guidelines 82 166 0 248 17
DECA 0 0 20 20 1
FLA 4 0 0 4 0.3
Better Work 50 3 0 53 4
Total 862 513 46 1,421
40 Number of reports received.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
175 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
PLANET
Target70
70% absolute reduction of GHG emissions 
in owned or operated facilities through 100% 
renewable electricity and fleet electrification
Greenhouse gas emissions from key suppliers’ 
manufacturing and transportation operations 
will be at or below 2020 levels through use 
of renewable energy, energy efficiency and 
alternative fuels
0.5M metric tons of GHG emissions reduced 
through increasing our use of environmentally 
preferred materials to 50% of all key materials
Appendix Data Tables
FY22 Emissions Summary (Metric Tons CO2e) Scope 1, 2, And 371
Emissions Emissions (%)
Scope 1 50,86822 0.5%
Scope 2 (market-based emissions) 24,90022 0.3%
Scope 3 9,953,491 99.2%
Total 10,029,259
70 These targets comprehensively cover our Scope 1 and 2 emissions, and cover part of our Scope 3 emissions.
71 NIKE converts all energy consumption to kWhe using net calorific value of the direct fuels consumption, including transportation fuels. Emissions data for HFCs, PFCs and SF6 are not 
reported. NIKE has phased out SF6 and therefore doesn’t have SF6 emissions. Emissions for other greenhouse gases are either not relevant, immaterial, or data is not available.
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as 
indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
176 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Energy and Emissions by Business Function (Scope 1 and Scope 2 (Market-based))
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) Energy (MWh)
Scope 1 
FY20
Scope 1 
FY21
Scope 1 
FY22
Scope 2 
FY20
Scope 2 
FY21
Scope 2
FY22
Fuel 
consumption 
FY20
Fuel 
consumption 
FY21
Fuel 
consumption 
FY22
Electricity 
consumption 
FY20
Electricity 
consumption 
FY21
Electricity 
consumption 
FY22
Retail 18,210 17,761 18,611 68,748 41,391 10,178 89,898 87,682 91,880 204,033 186,654 196,685
HQs & Offices 18,488 13,934 14,530 33,769 18,352 4,062 73,028 49,966 53,522 152,909 121,015 115,051
HQ Fleet Vehicles 1,407 227 253 − − − 5,582 904 1,004 − − −
Distribution Centers 9,676 11,224 12,149 38,829 14,523 7,708 47,244 54,852 59,802 191,711 197,657 194,685
Corporate Jets 2,912 1,432 3,515 − − − 11,257 5,534 13,356 − − −
Air Manufacturing Innovation 1,620 1,884 1,809 19,494 2,155 2,952 6,311 7,604 7,219 94,290 86,885 82,116
NIKE, Inc. 52,312 46,462 50,86822 160,840 76,420 24,90022 233,320 206,541 226,783 642,943 592,211 588,537
Appendix Data Tables
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
177 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Fuel Consumption (MWh) and Scope 1 Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e)
FY20 FY21 FY22
Air MI
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 6,311 7,604 7,219
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 1,620 1,884 1,809
HQ Fleet Vehicles 
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 5,582 904 1,004
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 1,407 227 253
Corporate Jets
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 11,257 5,534 13,356
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 2,912 1,432 3,515
Distribution Centers
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 47,244 54,852 59,802
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 9,676 11,224 12,149
FY20 FY21 FY22
HQs & Offices
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 73,028 49,966 53,522
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 18,488 13,934 14,530
Retail
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 89,898 87,682 91,880
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 18,210 17,761 18,611
NIKE, Inc.
Fuel Consumption (MWh) 233,320 206,541 226,783
Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) 52,312 46,462 50,86822
Appendix Data Tables
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
178 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
FY20 FY21 FY22
Retail
Total Electricity (MWh) 204,033 186,654 196,685
Grid Electricity 204,033 186,654 196,685
Location-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 89,493 80,922 81,073
Market-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 68,748 41,391 10,178
NIKE, Inc.
Total Electricity (MWh) 642,943 592,211 588,537
Grid Electricity 624,379 568,535 567,418
Onsite Solar 7,433 8,557 11,579
Onsite Wind 11,131 15,120 9,540
Location-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 271,176 251,579 224,03522
Market-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 160,840 76,420 24,90022
Electricity Consumption (MWh) and Scope 2 Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e)
FY20 FY21 FY22
Air MI
Grid Electricity (MWh) 94,290 86,885 82,116
Location-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 46,059 42,151 38,531
Market-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 19,494 2,155 2,952
Distribution Centers
Total Electricity (MWh) 191,711 197,657 194,685
Grid Electricity (MWh) 173,775 174,388 174,851
Onsite Solar (MWh) 6,805 8,150 10,294
Onsite Wind (MWh) 11,131 15,120 9,540
Location-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 79,178 81,550 62,811
Market-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 38,829 14,523 7,708
HQs and Offices
Total Electricity (MWh) 152,909 121,015 115,051
Grid Electricity 152,281 120,608 113,766
Onsite Solar 628 407 1,285
Location-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 56,446 46,956 41,620
Market-Based (Metric Tons CO2e) 33,769 18,352 4,062
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
179 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Scope 3 Emissions: Manufacturing & Logistics (Metric Tons CO2e)
FY20 FY21 FY22
Tier 1 – Footwear Manufacturing 1,388,826 1,411,754 1,469,481
Tier 1 – Apparel Manufacturing 89,865 72,601 87,753
Tier 2 – Footwear Textile Dyeing and Finishing 207,713 193,463 194,364
Tier 2 – Apparel Textile Dyeing and Finishing 785,487 727,076 767,499
Logistics – Inbound Transportation 1,013,581 275,199 413,99822
Logistics – Outbound Transportation 164,690 184,719 152,86922
Appendix Data Tables
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
180 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Science-Based Targets (SBT) Footprint FY15–21 (Metric Tons CO2e)
FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22
Scope 1
Air Manufacturing Innovation 126 114 145 496 1,229 1,620 1,884 1,809
HQ Fleet Vehicles 406 535 666 627 555 1,407 227 253
Corporate Jets 3,576 4,392 3,391 3,773 3,162 2,912 1,432 3,515
Distribution Centers 8,084 6,698 7,861 10,048 10,408 9,676 11,224 12,149
HQs & Offices 10,009 11,623 13,168 10,975 13,612 18,488 13,934 14,530
Retail 13,423 13,963 14,907 16,022 17,747 18,210 17,761 18,611
Total 35,624 37,325 40,138 41,941 46,713 52,312 46,462 50,86822
Scope 2 (market-based emissions)
Air Manufacturing Innovation 18,099 14,873 18,156 29,237 33,849 19,494 2,155 2,952
Distribution Centers 58,241 67,832 61,142 55,304 60,603 38,829 14,523 7,708
HQs & Offices 54,276 43,189 41,820 33,802 10,938 33,769 18,352 4,062
Retail 98,154 99,959 103,393 91,978 92,107 68,748 41,391 10,178
Total 228,770 225,853 224,511 210,321 209,065 160,840 76,420 24,90022
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
181 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18 FY19 FY20 FY21 FY22
Scope 3
Waste Generated in Operations 1,738 1,973 2,031 2,245 1,951 2,322 1,810 1,999
Downstream Transportation and Distribution 63,787 71,510 67,753 70,403 64,979 91,862 78,184 85,146
Energy-Related Activities Excluded in S1/S2 11,163 12,151 13,140 14,128 15,117 15,289 13,025 15,062
End-of-Life 375,270 393,776 404,768 417,717 439,028 452,856 418,080 618,851
Logistics 1,064,313 880,326 1,146,359 1,104,695 1,192,920 1,304,489 544,099 644,305
Packaging 539,198 560,225 582,072 604,771 628,355 652,859 954,955 683,365
Business Travel (Corporate Air Travel) 112,355 110,523 81,913 75,645 89,464 81,340 3,395 13,29722
Employee Commuting 98,546 106,755 114,964 123,173 131,382 107,314 85,746 98,473 
T2–T4 ACC 722,333 723,829 620,552 653,580 669,971 642,926 568,895 685,694
T1 Waste 44 43 42 41 40 42 20 26
T1 FW 1,007,402 1,018,623 1,086,039 1,182,089 1,176,709 1,415,163 1,444,915 1,504,501
T1 ACC 114,074 114,310 98,000 103,216 105,805 97,785 89,842 113,286
T1 AP 175,719 181,408 193,409 204,659 215,796 200,266 170,779 177,402
T2 AP 589,308 712,818 809,594 839,357 873,069 1,008,183 963,898 1,030,009
T2 FW 216,662 220,386 208,238 190,208 201,344 282,439 328,634 338,264
T3 AP 1,097,424 1,132,893 1,207,583 1,277,571 1,346,980 1,267,251 1,179,185 558,004
T3 FW 357,005 378,591 389,155 396,536 416,934 458,388 430,053 523,463
T4 AP 764,803 789,522 841,574 890,349 938,721 893,826 778,623 682,022
T4 FW 1,908,139 2,023,515 2,079,979 2,119,428 2,228,453 2,629,520 2,773,094 2,163,316
RTFKT – Primary Transactions 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16,590
RTFKT – Secondary Transactions 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 417
Total 9,219,282 9,433,177 9,947,164 10,269,811 10,737,016 11,604,118 10,827,234 9,953,491
Appendix Data Tables
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Science-Based Targets (SBT) Footprint FY15–21 (Metric Tons CO2e)
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
182 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
NIKE’s Carbon Targets Landscape
 Not in Scope Partial Scope included Full Scope included
Appendix Data Tables
RE100: 100% 
Renewable Electricity 
in Owned or Operated 
Facilities
-70% Owned or Operated 
Facility GHG Emissions
0% Change in Manufacturing 
& Transportation 
GHG Emissions72
0.5M Metric Tons Materials 
GHG Emissions Reduced 
via Use of Environmentally 
Preferred Materials (EPMs) Scope 1 and 2 SBT Scope 3 SBT Net Zero Full Corporate Carbon Footprint
Energy or Emissions Energy Emissions Emissions Emissions Emissions Emissions Emissions Emissions
Emissions Scope 2 1 & 2 3 3 1 & 2 3 1, 2 & 3 1, 2 & 3
Target Period FY15–25 FY20–25 FY20–25 FY20–25 FY15–30 FY15–30 FY15–50 N/A
Target 100% -70% 0% -0.5M metric tons 
50% EPMs
-65% -30% -90% N/A
Scope: NIKE Value Chain Terminology
Corporate Services
HQs & Other Offices
HQ Fleet
Air MI
Corporate Jets
Commercial Air Business Travel
Raw Materials Production
Materials Manufacturing
Materials Finishing (Textile Dyeing and Finishing)
Finished Goods Manufacturing
Logistics
Inbound Logistics
Outbound Logistics
Distribution Centers
Retail (NIKE Direct)
Consumer Use
End of Life
72 Scope includes suppliers representing approximately 80% of total footwear and apparel production; suppliers representing approximately 80% of total footwear upper materials and apparel textiles production; and about 95% of both inbound and outbound transportation.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
183 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Scope 3 Emissions by Category and Operational Boundaries
 Not in SBT Scope In SBT Scope 
Emissions Sources
FY22 Metric Tons 
CO2e and/or Evaluation Status Scope of Reported Emissions Emissions Calculation Methodology
% of Emissions Calculated Using Data 
Obtained From Suppliers or Value Chain 
Partners
Upstream
1 Purchased Goods and Services 8,476,358 Includes emissions across NIKE brands and 
product engines, including from raw materials 
production, materials manufacturing, materials 
finishing, finished goods manufacturing, packaging 
materials, and transactions via RTFKT (since 
acquisition in FY22).
Starting with FY22 data, end of life emissions 
from packaging have been migrated from 
Category 1 to Category 12 (End-of-Life Treatment 
of Sold Products) as more granular data has 
become available.
Emissions data is calculated using primary activity data and 
extrapolations. CO2e emissions include CO2, CH4, and N2O. NIKE Brand 
and Converse footwear finished goods manufacturing emissions data is 
derived from 97% primary data; apparel from 63% primary data. For this 
subset, vendors provide monthly energy consumption: from the local utility 
grid, onsite generators, other fuels, and purchased steam. For electricity: 
kWh values are multiplied by CO2e emissions factors for electricity 
purchased from the local utility grid by the country/region in which the 
factory resides. For onsite generation and other fuels: CO2e emissions 
are calculated using the IPCC bottoms up calculation methodology. 
CO2e methodologies are used for emissions estimates outside of 
footwear finished goods manufacturing based on lifecycle analysis data 
applied to product creation data, and employ conservative assumptions 
to avoid understating NIKE’s footprint. To evaluate NIKE’s value chain 
footprint, we identified and quantified CO2e emissions created at each 
stage of the value chain. The impact of each individual product differs 
considerably, based on its profile, materials used, size and weight, method 
of manufacture, and location of production, use, and disposal. Several 
internal and external tools were used to develop this estimation including 
NIKE’s Materials Sustainability Index, Enablon, and COMPASS (life cycle 
packaging tool).
As of FY22, we’ve aligned with the latest version of updated Sustainable 
Apparel Coalition’s Higg MSI (Higg MSI) lifecycle emission factors. See 
GRI 305-3: Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions section for details.
31%
2 Capital Goods Not relevant NIKE does not have significant investment in 
capital goods as most manufacturing equipment 
is owned and operated by contracted factories.
N/A N/A
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
184 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Sources
FY22 Metric Tons 
CO2e and/or Evaluation Status Scope of Reported Emissions Emissions Calculation Methodology
% of Emissions Calculated Using Data 
Obtained From Suppliers or Value Chain 
Partners
3 Fuel and Energy-Related Activities 
Not Included in Scope 1 or 2
15,062 Includes emissions associated with the extraction, 
production, and transportation of fuels and 
energy purchased and reported in NIKE’s Scope 
1 footprint. Does not include upstream electricity 
emissions, T&D losses, or other onsite fuels 
besides natural gas (propane, diesel, biogas, 
hi-sene).
Emissions data is calculated using primary activity data, extrapolated 
consumption, and publicly available CO2e emissions factors. 
Consumption is multiplied by the emissions factor, using an identical 
global factor across all countries and regions.
58%
4 Upstream Transportation and Distribution 644,305 Includes ~95% of global inbound transportation 
and ~95% of global outbound transportation via 
the following modes of transportation: air, ocean, 
truck and rail. Excludes non-NIKE paid freight. 
Also included is the shipment via air freight of NIKE 
AirBags produced in North America and shipped 
as components for footwear manufacturing to 
manufacturing partners in Asia.
Transactional data is applied to a third-party transportation carbon 
calculator against industry standard emissions factors (distance travelled 
x cargo weight or volume x emission factor). Upstream emissions from air 
transport of airbag components is calculated using industry standard air 
freight emission factors per ton-mile and production volume.
100%
5 Waste Generated in Operations 1,999 Emissions relative to the fate of the waste 
generated in our own operations including HQs, 
DCs, and Air MI.
Total HQs, DCs, and Air MI waste not diverted from landfill multiplied by 
a lifecycle assessment-based emission factor for municipal waste sent to 
landfill.
100%
6 Business Travel 13,297 Includes emissions from commercial air travel. Air CO2 emissions are estimated based on number and distance of trips. 
Short haul trips are less fuel efficient per mile flown. Longer-haul flights 
become less efficient due to the need to carry more fuel.
100%
7 Employee Commuting 98,473 Emissions associated with the transportation 
of employees between their homes and work 
locations. Represents regular and 
temporary employees.
Internal employee commuting survey data is used to inform the allocation 
of methods/modes that NIKE applies to its global employee base. Each 
mode is assigned an emission factor relative to fuel type. Assumptions 
are made about the average number of working days per year, average 
number of commuting days per year (given introduction of the flex 
work week), and the average distance between an employee’s home 
and worksite.
18%
8 Upstream Leased Assets Not relevant NIKE does not have significant emissions from 
upstream leased assets.
N/A N/A
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
185 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Sources
FY22 Metric Tons 
CO2e and/or Evaluation Status Scope of Reported Emissions Emissions Calculation Methodology
% of Emissions Calculated Using Data 
Obtained From Suppliers or Value Chain 
Partners
Downstream
9 Downstream Transportation and Distribution 85,146 Includes emissions from non-NIKE paid freight. 
Excludes emissions from consumers traveling 
to stores.
 Transactional data is applied to a third-party transportation carbon 
calculator against industry standard emissions factors (distance travelled 
x cargo weight or volume x emission factor). Non-NIKE paid freight is 
determined calculating the difference between Inbound and Outbound 
freight and using the outbound freight emissions factor to determine 
total emissions.
 0%
10 Processing of Sold Products Not relevant NIKE’s products are finished consumer goods 
and do not undergo any additional processing 
once sold.
N/A N/A
11 Use of Sold Products 7,968,735 These emissions are associated with washing 
and drying NIKE’s sold apparel and starting with 
FY22 data, socks. Footwear and equipment were 
assumed to not be washed. Emissions from use of 
sold products are excluded from SBT scope.
There is no primary emissions data available from use of NIKE’s 
products. Consumer energy usage was estimated based on the following 
assumptions: only apparel units and socks are washed and dried. Each 
item was assumed to be washed 52 times in one year. The washing 
assumptions were based on regional consumer washing practices and 
estimates of washing machine types by region. CO2e was based on 
regional conversion factors applied to the estimated energy usage.
 0%
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
186 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Sources
FY22 Metric Tons 
CO2e and/or Evaluation Status Scope of Reported Emissions Emissions Calculation Methodology
% of Emissions Calculated Using Data 
Obtained From Suppliers or Value Chain 
Partners
12 End-of-Life Treatment of Sold Products 618,851 These emissions are associated with the disposal 
of products including landfill and incineration.
There is no primary emissions data available for end-of-life treatment of 
NIKE’s products. To evaluate NIKE’s value chain footprint, we identified 
and quantified CO2e emissions created at each stage of the value chain. 
The impact of each individual product differs considerably, based on 
its profile, materials used, size and weight, method of manufacture, and 
location of production, use and disposal. Several internal and external 
tools were used to develop this estimation including NIKE’s Materials 
Sustainability Index, EPA’s Waste Reduction Model (WARM), and 
COMPASS (life cycle packaging tool). Finished goods were assumed 
to be disposed of at the end of one year.
Based on waste treatment data from the COMPASS software database, 
end-of-life (EOL) carbon impacts from packaging are calculated using 
country and material-specific packaging waste treatment data and 
emissions factors. This includes assumptions from COMPASS on waste 
treatment pathways for specific geographies and material type pairings 
as well as emissions factors for each type of treatment (e.g. recycling, 
landfilling, etc.). Prior to FY22, NIKE included the EOL impacts of 
Packaging in the “Purchased Goods and Services” category. 
0%
13 Downstream Leased Assets Not relevant NIKE does not have significant emissions from 
downstream leased assets.
N/A N/A
14 Franchises Not relevant NIKE does not have significant emissions from 
franchises.
N/A N/A
15 Investments Not relevant NIKE does not have significant emissions from 
investments.
N/A N/A
Total SBT S3 Emissions 9,953,491
Total Full Footprint S3 Emissions 17,922,226
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
187 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
Waste (Metric Tons)
FY20 FY21 FY22
Distribution Centers (DCs)
Recycled 36,713 33,856 33,795
Composted 117 86 138
Waste to Energy 1,637 2,214 3,001
Landfilled 3,664 3,663 3,148
Total 42,131 39,820 40,082
HQs
Recycled 1,661 1,157 1,946
Composted 1,043 697 1,003
Waste to Energy 0 2 111
Landfilled 2,142 790 882
Total 4,846 2,646 3,942
FW Manufacturing73
Recycled 49,629 51,584 59,067
Energy Recovery 60,675 50,968 50,078
Landfilled and Incinerated 429 − −
Total 110,733 102,553 109,144
FY20 FY21 FY22
AP Manufacturing73
Recycled 20,076 14,557 21,309
Waste to Energy 2,371 2,540 2,827
Landfilled and Incinerated 924 387 409
Total 23,371 17,484 24,545
Air MI
Recycled 44,339 32,780 28,458
Waste to Energy 182 169 11
Landfilled and Incinerated 1,284 957 817
Total 45,805 33,906 29,286
Total Weight of Hazardous Waste (Metric Tons) Generated in Footwear Manufacturing74
FY22
Total Weight 12,398
73 Strategic Finished Goods Suppliers: Suppliers representing approximately 80% of total footwear and apparel production.
74 Annual compliance assessments verify that suppliers are meeting the requirements in the NIKE Code of Conduct and Code Leadership Standards (CLS). Verifiers confirm that partners 
have obtained all required permits with safety, health and environmental control programs including proper management of hazardous waste and hazardous waste vendors selected by the 
supplier being properly qualified and licensed.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
188 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix Data Tables
FY22 Fuel & Electricity Consumption (MWh) & Scope 1 & 2 Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) by Country
Country/Region
Fuel Consumption 
(MWh)
Scope 1 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Grid Electricity 
(MWh)
Onsite Solar
(MWh)
Onsite Wind
(MWh)
Location-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Market-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Argentina 1,190 255 3,257 0 0 938 0
Australia 989 218 2,369 0 0 1,629 1,629
Austria 579 117 745 0 0 102 0
Belgium 11,147 1,744 35,516 5,916 9,540 5,899 165
Brazil 86 24 137 0 0 14 0
Canada 10,865 2,217 6,542 0 0 849 0
Chile 680 146 2,460 0 0 1,091 0
China 37,995 8,391 68,236 3,026 0 42,695 498
Croatia 36 7 86 0 0 15 0
Czech Republic 216 44 236 0 0 104 0
Denmark 319 68 305 0 0 30 0
France 3,595 736 8,513 0 0 458 0
Germany 6,924 1,482 5,428 0 0 1,880 0
Greece 0 5 938 0 0 467 0
Hong Kong 578 149 1,369 0 0 1,126 1,126
Hungary 297 60 407 0 0 93 0
India 511 144 859 0 0 624 0
Indonesia 126 35 465 0 0 356 0
Ireland 303 64 790 0 0 233 0
Israel 0 7 1,172 0 0 562 0
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
189 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
FY22 Fuel & Electricity Consumption (MWh) & Scope 1 & 2 Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) by Country
Country/Region
Fuel Consumption 
(MWh)
Scope 1 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Grid Electricity 
(MWh)
Onsite Solar
(MWh)
Onsite Wind
(MWh)
Location-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Market-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Italy 2,359 521 5,539 0 0 1,585 0
Japan 6,215 1,291 15,533 0 0 7,593 7,593
Malaysia 525 112 1,229 0 0 817 0
Mexico 3,266 686 7,491 762 0 2,985 2,985
Netherlands 3,515 1,004 8,948 0 0 3,305 0
New Zealand 73 15 489 0 0 60 60
Norway 212 46 250 0 0 3 0
Philippines 62 17 699 0 0 472 0
Poland 1,089 223 1,384 0 0 925 0
Portugal 0 0 714 0 0 170 0
Russia 2,084 446 2,516 0 0 944 1,116
Singapore 692 178 1,746 0 0 675 675
South Africa 674 146 1,642 0 0 1,538 0
South Korea 6,199 1,458 8,066 0 0 4,173 4,173
Spain 3,400 717 8,360 0 0 1,665 0
Sweden 369 86 232 0 0 3 0
Switzerland 287 58 386 0 0 9 0
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
190 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
FY22 Fuel & Electricity Consumption (MWh) & Scope 1 & 2 Emissions (Metric Tons CO2e) by Country
Country/Region
Fuel Consumption 
(MWh)
Scope 1 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Grid Electricity 
(MWh)
Onsite Solar
(MWh)
Onsite Wind
(MWh)
Location-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Market-Based Scope 2 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
Taiwan 1,046 252 2,573 0 0 1,431 1,431
Thailand 449 98 827 0 0 385 0
Turkey 1,011 216 1,990 0 0 862 0
United Arab Emirates 7 2 8 0 0 4 0
United Kingdom 6,540 1,392 8,802 0 0 1,852 0
United States of America 109,891 25,878 342,950 2,144 0 130,290 327
Uruguay 198 41 432 0 0 5 5
Vietnam 184 71 4,780 0 0 3,118 3,118
Total 226,783 50,86822 567,419 11,849 9,540 224,03522 24,90022
Appendix Data Tables
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
191 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
FY22 Total Energy Consumption (MWh)
 Energy Type Heating Value
MWh from Renewable 
Sources
MWh from NonRenewable Sources Total MWh
Fuel LHV (lower 
heating value)
2,550 224,074 226,623
Purchased or Acquired Electricity 547,405 41,132 588,537
Sustainable Aviation Fuel 159 0 159
Total 550,114 265,206 815,320
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
192 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
FY22 Renewable Energy (MWh) by Country and Type 
RE Type Onsite RE Power Purchase Agreements Unbundled Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) Alternative Fuels
Country Onsite Solar Onsite Wind
PPA: 
Oregon 
Avangrid
VPPA: 
North 
America 
Avangrid
VPPA: 
Europe 
Avangrid
RECs: 
Biomass
RECs: 
Hydroelectric
RECs: 
Solar
RECs: 
Wind
RECs: 
Wind & 
Solar Biogas
Sustainable 
Aviation 
Fuel Total
Argentina – – – – – – – – 3,257 – – – 3,257
Austria – – – – 745 – – – – – – – 745
Belgium 5,916 9,540 – – 541 12,944 835 7,951 17,223 – 2,550 – 57,500
Brazil – – – – – – – – 137 – – – 137
Canada – – – 6,542 – – – – – – – – 6,542
Chile – – – – – – – 2,460 – – – – 2,460
China 3,026 – – – – – – 386 – 67,440 – – 70,853
Croatia – – – – 86 – – – – – – – 86
Czech Republic – – – – 236 – – – – – – – 236
Denmark – – – – 305 – – – – – – – 305
France – – – – 8,513 – – – – – – – 8,513
Germany – – – – 5,428 – – – – – – – 5,428
Greece – – – – 938 – – – – – – – 938
Hungary – – – – 407 – – – – – – – 407
India – – – – – – – – – 859 – – 859
Indonesia – – – – – – – 465 – – – – 465
Ireland – – – – 790 – – – – – – – 790
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
193 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
RE Type Onsite RE Power Purchase Agreements Unbundled Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) Alternative Fuels
Country Onsite Solar Onsite Wind
PPA: 
Oregon 
Avangrid
VPPA: 
North 
America 
Avangrid
VPPA: 
Europe 
Avangrid
RECs: 
Biomass
RECs: 
Hydroelectric
RECs: 
Solar
RECs: 
Wind
RECs: 
Wind & 
Solar Biogas
Sustainable 
Aviation 
Fuel Total
Israel – – – – – – – 1,172 – – – – 1,172
Italy – – – – 5,539 – – – – – – – 5,539
Malaysia – – – – – – – 1,229 – – – – 1,229
Mexico 762 – – – – – – – – – – – 762
Netherlands – – – – 8,948 – – – – – – – 8,948
Norway – – – – 250 – – – – – – – 250
Philippines – – – – – – – 699 – – – – 699
Poland – – – – 1,384 – – – – – – – 1,384
Portugal – – – – 714 – – – – – – – 714
South Africa – – – – – – – 1,642 – – – – 1,642
Spain – – – – 8,360 – – – – – – – 8,360
Sweden – – – – 232 – – – – – – – 232
Switzerland – – – – 386 – – – – – – – 386
Thailand – – – – – – – – – 827 – – 827
Turkey – – – – – – – – 1,990 – – – 1,990
United Arab Emirates – – – – – – – 8 – – – – 8
United Kingdom – – – – 8,802 – – – – – – – 8,802
United States of America 1,875 – 110,221 231,851 – – – 3,543 – – – 159 347,648
Total 11,579 9,540 110,221 238,393 52,606 12,944 835 19,555 22,607 69,127 2,550 159 550,114
Appendix Data Tables
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
194 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Fuel Consumption by Fuel Type 
(MWh) 
FY22
Natural Gas 207,938
Jet Fuel 13,197
Sustainable Aviation Fuel 159
Hi-Sene 2,960
Gasoline 804
Diesel 1,715
Propane 10
Total 226,783
Scope 1 Emissions by Gas 
(Metric Tons CO2e)
FY22
CH4 111
CO2 46,299
N2O 42
Refrigerant CO2e 4,415
Total 50,868
Steam, Heat, Cooling Consumption
(MWh)
FY22
Steam 0
Heat 0
Cooling 0
Biogenic Emissions 
(Metric Tons CO2e) 
FY22
Biomass Renewable 
Energy Credits 
4,660
Biogenic Emissions 
from SAF
0.0000000017
Total 4,660
22 This metric is part of Management’s Assertion on select sustainability metrics, which PwC has performed limited assurance over for the period from June 1, 2021, to May 31, 2022, as indicated in the Report of Independent Accountants. 
75 Tier 1 and 2 data includes renewable energy use across footwear only up to FY20, at which point apparel has been added to reporting scope. Owned or operated data includes electricity only; full energy view for FY22 can be seen on the previous pages.
Appendix Data Tables
Renewable Energy (MWh) 
Manufacturing (Tier 1) and Textile Dyeing and Finishing (Tier 2)75 FY20 FY21 FY22
Renewable Direct Fuel Consumption 487,754 443,212 543,689
% of Total 20% 19% 22%
Renewable Electricity Consumption 13,402 29,897 232,256
% of Total 0.4% 1% 7%
Renewable Energy Consumption 531,010 479,774 798,393
% of Total 8% 8% 13%
Owned or Operated
Renewable Direct Fuel Consumption 365 2,171 2,709
% of Total 0.2% 1% 1%
Renewable Electricity Consumption 310,798 459,127 547,40522
% of Total 48% 78% 93%22
Renewable Energy Consumption 311,163 461,298 550,11422
% of Total 36% 58% 67%22
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
195 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Appendix GRI
This report has been prepared in accordance 
with the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards.
GENERAL DISCLOSURES
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-1 Organizational details FY22 Form 10-K: Item 1. Business: page 1–2
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 2. Properties: page 24
2-2 Entities included in the organization’s 
sustainability reporting
Reporting Methodology: page 156
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 1. Business: page 1
2-3 Reporting period, frequency and contact point Reporting Methodology: page 156
Nike reports on an annual reporting cycle
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
196 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-4 Restatements of information In cases where shifts in scope, methodology and/or data quality have led to changes in 
previously reported performance results, we’ve restated historically reported results.
Sustainability data is shaped by a landscape of evolving methodologies, advancing standards, 
and expansions in data accessibility over time. Adapting to these changes while maintaining 
comparability in our data is critical to instilling integrity and confidence in the validity of the 
insights the data provides. We understand that we must adapt and be nimble to keep pace 
with new innovations, broadening data sets, and emerging standards. We continue to focus 
on the internal controls in our sustainability data processes and systems. 
We have obtained external assurance on select reported metrics (Scope 1 and 2 energy 
consumption and emissions, renewable energy including direct fuel use and electricity, 
Scope 3 commercial air travel emissions, and inbound and outbound logistics emissions; and 
cumulative water restoration funding). More information can be found in the Appendix. 
COVID-19 Methodology
Estimation methodology for FY20 Q4 COVID-19 slowdown adjustments are as follows:
− Carbon Scope 1 and 2 Emissions (except for HQ security vehicles); Transportation 
Emissions – Activity Data: FY20 Q3 trailing
12 months ((TTM); FY20 Q4 = FY19 Q4). Emissions Factors, Scope: unadjusted FY20.
− Carbon Manufacturing Emissions – Activity Data: FY20 Q4 = percent of FY observed 
historically. Emissions Factors, Scope:
unadjusted FY20.
− Waste Manufacturing and Packaging – FY20 Q4 = average of Q1–3.
− Waste DCs, HQs, Air MI – FY20 Q3 TTM.
− Water – FY20 Q4 = average of Q1–3.
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
197 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
Restatements of information Due to the effects of COVID-19, the fourth quarter of FY20 (March 2020–May 2020) resulted in 
lower than normal production, impacting the final measurement year of our FY20 targets and 
baseline measurement year of our FY25 targets. To help enable measurement consistency 
and avoid the inevitable artificial reductions in performance metrics during this unprecedented 
time, continuing our approach from our FY20 NIKE Impact Report, we have adjusted Q4 
performance figures for the targets that were most impacted (carbon, waste and water). 
These Q4 adjustments generally reflect an FY20 Q3 trailing 12-month view of performance 
and provided a more conservative view of where we landed on FY20 targets than would be 
rendered using actual performance figures during the global shutdown. These adjustments 
had the effect of inflating our footprint to resemble business as usual and were only applied to 
targets where we were aiming for a reduction in impact vs. baseline (“reduction targets”) and 
to targets where we were aiming to reach a certain percentage (“reach targets”) that share 
underlying data with reduction targets. None of the adjustments resulting in meeting targets 
that we would not have met if we didn’t normalize our performance to minimize the impact of 
the COVID-19 slowdown on our FY20 targets target year and FY25 targets baseline year. We 
carried this approach through to measuring performance toward our FY25 targets to ensure 
consistency in how we accounted for the pandemic across target periods.”
See more details here.
2-5 External assurance Reporting Methodology: page 156
Assurance Report: page 195
2-6 Activities, value chain and other business 
relationships
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 1. Business: pages 1–7
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 1A. Risk factors: page 15
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and 
Results of Operations: page 28 
Code of Conduct: page 83
Data Tables: page 182
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
198 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-7 Employees Data Tables: pages 164–170
NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: page 197
FY22 Form 10-K: Item 7. Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and 
results of operations: page 28
FY22 Form 10-K: Note 21 - Restructuring: page 92
Additional Information
FY22
Total employees by employment type and gender*
Unknown
HC
Female
HC
Female % of 
total
Male
HC
Male % 
of total
Full-Time 0 27,259 77% 27,607 77%
Part-Time 0 8,315 23% 8,226 23%
Total Regular 0 35,574 100% 35,833 100%
FY22
Nike, Inc. employee totalsby ethnicity (U.S.)**
All 
employees Directors+ VPs
U.S. Racial and Ethnic Minorities 63.0% 34.6% 34.3%
Unknown 1.2% 1.0% 1.7%
White (Not Hispanic/Latino) 35.8% 64.4% 64.0%
2-8 Workers who are not employees We do not have a significant portion of the organization’s activities performed by people who 
are not employees.
2-9 Governance structure and composition Governance: page 161
Data Tables: page 170
FY22 Proxy Statement: page 8
FY22 Proxy Statement: page 21–23
* This is Corp, Retail, AirMi, and DC and Global
** This is Corp, Retail, AirMi, and DC and US-Only
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
199 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-10 Nomination and selection of the highest 
governance body
Nominating & Corporate Governance Committee
2022 Proxy Statement: page 20
2-11 Chair of the highest governance body Welcome to NIKE, Inc.
2-12 Role of the highest governance body in 
overseeing the management of impacts
Governance: page 161
FY22 Proxy Statement: page 23
Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Committee
Nominating & Corporate Governance Committee
2-13 Delegation of responsibility for 
managing impacts
Governance: page 161
2-14 Role of the highest governance body 
in sustainability reporting
Reporting Methodology: page 156
2-15 Conflicts of interest Code of Conduct: page 13
2-16 Communication of critical concerns Code of Conduct
Human Rights and Labor Compliance Standards
Speak UP Portal
Statement on Forced Labor
2-17 Collective knowledge of the highest 
governance body
Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Committee
2-18 Evaluation of the performance of the 
highest governance body
Corporate Responsibility & Sustainability Committee
FY22 Proxy Statement: page 23
2-19 Remuneration policies FY22 Proxy Statement: pages 25–26
FY22 Proxy Statement: pages 42
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
200 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-20 Process to determine remuneration Compensation Committee
FY22 Proxy Statement: pages 29–34
FY22 Proxy Statement: pages 39
2-21 Annual total compensation ratio FY22 Proxy Statement: page 50
Pay & Benefits: pages 40–41
2-22 Statement on sustainable development 
strategy
Letter from John: page 3
2-23 Policy commitments Sustainability Commitments
Sustainability Policies
Human Rights and Labor Compliance Standards (2018)
Code of Conduct: page 83
NIKE Code of Conduct
NIKE Code Leadership Standards
NIKE Inside the Lines Code of Conduct
2-24 Embedding policy commitments Sustainability Commitments
Sustainability Policies
Human Rights and Labor Compliance Standards (2018)
Code of Conduct: page 83
NIKE Code of Conduct
NIKE Code Leadership Standards
NIKE Inside the Lines Code of Conduct
2-25 Processes to remediate negative impacts Code of Conduct: pages 83–84
Human Rights and Labor Compliance Standards (2018)
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
201 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
2-26 Mechanisms for seeking advice and 
raising concerns
Code of Conduct: page 8
NIKE Inside the Lines Code of Conduct
Speak UP Portal
Human Rights and Labor Compliance Standards (2018)
2-27 Compliance with laws and regulations Data Tables: page 173
2-28 Membership associations Impact Partnerships and Collaborations
2-29 Approach to stakeholder engagement Issue Prioritization: page 157
Impact Partnerships and Collaborations
2-30 Collective bargaining agreements FY22 Form 10-K: page 6 UNGC Principle 3
3-1 Process to determine material topics Issue Prioritization: page 157
3-2 List of material topics Issue Prioritization: pages 158–160
3-3 Management of material topics 2022 Form 10-K: page 12
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
202 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
201-1 Direct economic value generated and 
distributed
2022 Form 10-K: page 29
201-2 Financial implications and other risks and 
opportunities due to climate change
2022 Form 10-K: page 9
201-3 Defined benefit plan obligations and other 
retirement plans
Pay & Benefits: pages 40–50 
Jobs at NIKE
3-3 Management of material topics Carbon: pages 102–105
Sustainability Commitments
301-1 Materials used by weight or volume Carbon: page 105
NIKE reports its top material volumes, which include renewable materials: cotton and leather; 
and non-renewable materials: polyester, rubber and EVA foam. All material types reported 
are purchased from external suppliers except for EVA foam, which is sourced internally. Data 
reported consists of both direct measurements and estimates. While many materials are 
measured directly for a wide variety of products, some volumes are estimated. The majority 
of cotton and polyester volume data is sourced using direct measurements, though product 
creation data is used to estimate material volumes for certain parts of the business. UNGC Principle 8
301-2 Recycled input materials used Carbon: page 105
301-3 Reclaimed products and their 
packaging materials
Waste: page 120
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
203 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
3-3 Management of material topics Carbon: page 90–110
Sustainability Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 22–23
302-1 Energy consumption within the organization Data Tables: pages 176–178, 186–192
GRI: page 194
2022 NIKE CDP
UNGC Principle 8
302-2 Energy consumption outside of the 
organization
Carbon: pages 90–101
Data Tables: pages 179–181
302-3 Energy intensity GRI: page 194
Data Tables: page 194
302-4 Reduction of energy consumption Data Tables: pages 176–178, 186–188
Carbon: pages 90–101
GRI: page 194
302-5 Reductions in energy requirements of 
products and services
Nike does not currently measure reductions in energy requirements of products and services. 
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
204 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
3-3 Management of material topics Water: pages 123–127
Sustainability Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 32-37
303-1 Interactions with water as a shared resource Water: pages 123–127
Additional Information
Contract manufacturers report their freshwater withdrawal volumes and source to NIKE in 
accordance with NIKE’s Water Program, which outlines measurement practices and defines 
freshwater sources. The facility boundary is equivalent to the property boundary, and 
freshwater is inclusive of domestic and manufacturing use.
303-2 Management of water discharge-related 
impacts
Water: pages 123–127
303-3 Water withdrawal Water: pages 123–127
Additional Information
Contract manufacturers report their freshwater withdrawal volumes and source to NIKE in 
accordance with NIKE’s Water Program, which outlines measurement practices and defines 
freshwater sources. The facility boundary is equivalent to the property boundary, and 
freshwater is inclusive of domestic and manufacturing use.
303-4 Water discharge Nike does not currently report on water discharge. 
303-5 Water consumption Water: pages 123–127
3-3 Management of material topics Carbon: pages 90–111
Sustainabilty Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 23-25
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
205 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
305-1 Direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions Data Tables: pages 175–177, 186–188, 192
NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: pages 198–203
GRI: page 193–194
Additional Information
NIKE converts all energy consumption to kWhe using net calorific value of the direct fuel 
consumption, including transportation fuels. Emissions data for HFCs, PFCs and SF6 are not 
reported. NIKE has phased out SF6 and therefore doesn’t have SF6 emissions. Emissions for 
other greenhouse gases are either not relevant, immaterial or data is not available. 
For information on direct and indirect energy consumption, Scope 1 and 2 emissions and 
the Scope 3 emissions accounting standard used, see the Management Assertion letter. 
Additional breakdowns of Scope 1 and 2 emissions are shown below.
UNGC Principle 8
305-2 Energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions Data Tables: pages 178, 186–188
NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: pages 198–203
UNGC Principle 8
305-3 Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions Data Tables: pages 179–181
NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: pages 198–203
GRI: pages 193–194
Scope 3 Emissions:
Since the FY21 NIKE Impact Report publication in March 2022, NIKE updated the methodology 
used to calculate a subset of Scope 3 emissions, starting with FY22 data. These updates were 
not deployed to prior years. More information on these methodological changes is below. 
The Sustainable Apparel Coalition’s Higg MSI (Higg MSI) is a database of environmental 
impact information specific for the footwear and apparel industry and is among many data 
sources used to construct NIKE’s Scope 3 GHG emissions footprint. As the primary data 
source for quantifying NIKE’s upstream materials emissions (inclusive of raw materials and 
materials production), NIKE leverages Higg MSI in a programmatic way to systematically 
calculate the carbon impact of all of its materials used to make product.
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
206 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
Category 1 – Purchased Goods And Services
Materials used in Product
In FY22, NIKE used Higg MSI version 3.5 as the raw process data source and mapped Higg 
processes to NIKE material attributes to calculate impacts on a per kilogram basis, specific 
to a Nike material. The material-level carbon impact emission factors are multiplied by the 
volume of those respective materials used in product based on produced units in any given 
year. Prior to FY22, NIKE used an earlier version of the Higg MSI database to estimate the 
impact of all NIKE materials. Further, the ability to map NIKE materials processes to Higg data 
was not as detailed as today. We’re now able to more accurately align materials attributes (by 
process) to individual Higg process-level data. 
Materials used in Packaging 
Nike uses COMPASS – a third-party packaging life-cycle assessment (LCA) software – to 
calculate upstream materials and manufacturing carbon emission factors, to then estimate 
the impact of various packaging items including shoeboxes, polybags and hangtags. The 
packaging emission factors represent the carbon impact of the production and transport of 
materials and the manufacturing emissions associated with each packaging item.
Prior to FY22, all emissions from packaging (e.g. materials and end-of-life) were included in 
Category 1 – Purchased Goods & Services. As more granular data has become available, endof-life emissions from packaging have been migrated to Category 12 (End-of-Life Treatment of 
Sold Products), starting with FY22 data.
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
207 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
Scope 3 emissions:
Category 12 – End-Of-Life (EOL)
Materials used in Product
NIKE calculated EOL impacts of NIKE product based on derived material types and amounts 
used to manufacture product. Each material is classified as a specific category of materialtype including:
− Non-Biodegradable Fossil Plastic
− Biodegradable Biogenic Plastic
− Biodegradable Fossil Plastic
− Non-Biodegradable Biogenic Plastic
− Biodegradable Biogenic Non-Plastics
− Inorganics
For each of these material-type categories, specific EOL carbon impact emission factors are 
derived based on the EPA’s Waste Reduction Model (WARM) and derived biogenic carbon 
content. The EOL emission factor utilized was specific to each material type, and based 
on a weighted average breakdown of 67% landfill and 33% incineration, leveraging the 
global average waste treatment pathway for footwear and apparel products. For materials 
with biogenic carbon content, the fraction of biogenic and fossil carbon was taken into 
account when characterizing emissions. Before FY22, NIKE calculated EOL impacts of 
NIKE product based on the number of units produced, regardless of material type, and 
utilized an aggregated EOL carbon impact emission factor from the EPA’s Waste Reduction 
Model (WARM). The proxy material used from WARM was the “mixed MSW” waste type. 
Assumptions on global average waste treatment pathways remain unchanged. 
Packaging 
Based on waste treatment data from the COMPASS software database, EOL carbon impacts 
are calculated using country and material-specific packaging waste treatment data and 
emissions factors. This includes assumptions from COMPASS on waste treatment pathways 
for specific geographies and material type pairings as well as emissions factors for each 
type of treatment (e.g. recycling, landfilling). Prior to FY22, NIKE included the EOL impacts of 
Packaging in the “Purchased Goods and Services” category.
305-4 GHG emissions intensity NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: page 201
Nike reports intensity as kWh per square foot.
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
208 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
305-5 Reduction of GHG emissions Carbon: pages 90–111
NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion: pages 198–203
UNGC Principle 8
305-6 Emissions of ozone-depleting substances 
(ODS)
Nike does not track emissions of ozone-depleting substances.
305-7 Nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), 
and other significant air emissions
Nike does not track NOx, SOx, and other air emissions.
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
209 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
3-3 Management of material topics Waste: pages 111–122
Sustainability Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 25-31
306-1 Waste generation and significant wasterelated impacts
Waste: pages 111–122
306-2 Management of significant waste-related 
impacts
Waste: pages 111–122
UNGC Principle 8
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
210 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
306-3 Waste generated Data Tables: page 185
GRI: pages 193–194
306-4 Waste diverted from disposal Waste: pages 111–122
Data Tables: page 185
306-5 Waste directed to disposal Data Tables: page 185
3-3 Management of material topics Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 38-71, 75-105
403-1 Occupational health and safety management 
system
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 17-20
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
211 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
403-2 Hazard identification, risk assessment, and 
incident investigation
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
403-3 Occupational health services Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 17–20
403-4 Worker participation, consultation, and 
communication on occupational health 
and safety
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Nike Code Leadership Standards: page 20
403-5 Worker training on occupational health 
and safety
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Occupational Health and Safety: pages 58–59
Supply Chain Health and Safety
403-6 Promotion of worker health Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Occupational Health and Safety: pages 58–59
Supply Chain Health and Safety
403-7 Prevention and mitigation of occupational 
health and safety impacts directly linked by 
business relationships
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Occupational Health and Safety: pages 58–59
Supply Chain Health and Safety
403-8 Workers covered by an occupational health 
and safety management system
Health & Safety: pages 64–68
Occupational Health and Safety: pages 58–59
Supply Chain Health and Safety
Appendix GRI
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
212 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
403-9 Work-related injuries Data Tables: page 171
Health and Safety: pages 64–68
403-10 Work-related ill health Data Tables: pages 171
Occupational Health and Safety: pages 58–59
Supply Chain Health and Safety
Pay and Benefits: pages 47–48
3-3 Management of material topics Representation & Hiring: pages 20–40
Pay & Benefits: pages 40–50
Inclusive Culture & Engagement: pages 50–59
Sustainability Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 112–114
405-1 Diversity of governance bodies and 
employees
Data Tables: pages 164–170
Representation and Hiring: pages 20–40
UNGC Principle 6
405-2 Ratio of basic salary and remuneration of 
women to men
Pay & Benefits: pages 40–41
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
213 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GRI Number Disclosure Location and notes Omission
UNGC Principle / 
SDG Mapping
3-3 Management of material topics Code of Conduct: pages 83–84
Sustainability Commitments
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 106–112
409-1 Operations and suppliers at significant risk for 
incidents of forced or compulsory labor
Data Tables: page 173
Code of Conduct: pages 83–84
UNGC Principle 4
3-3 Management of material topics Health & Safety: pages 64–69
Nike Code Leadership Standards: pages 63-71
414-1 New suppliers that were screened using 
social criteria
Code of Conduct: page 79
414-2 Negative social impacts in the supply chain 
and actions taken
Data Tables: page 173
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
214 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Reference GRI 2-4: Restatements of information
Dataset Page Reason
Scope 1 Emissions; Direct 
Fuel Use
Target: 70% Emissions Reduction 
in Owned or Operated Facilities
Data tables: Numerous
49, 110, 180, 
182
The factors described below contributed to historical revisions of Scope 1 emissions data. With the updates, scope 1 emissions are +9% historically reported values, for both FY20 and 21.
1. Distribution Centers – Minor formulaic error discovered and corrected in biogas calculations.
2. Offices and Air MI – Expanded the reporting scope to include refrigerants as an emissions source.
3. Headquarter Fleet Vehicles – Gaps in historical diesel fuel and EHQ and Converse HQ fleet were addressed.
Carbon Target: 0% Emissions 
Change in Manufacturing &
Transportation
Data Tables: Scope 3 Emissions: 
Manufacturing & Logistics (Metric 
Tons CO2e)
Sbt Footprint FY15-22 (Metric 
Tons CO2e)
13, 49, 110, 
181
Outbound Transportation Emissions
Internal reporting restructuring shifted treatment of Global Store to further consistency in geography reporting. During the shift, minor shipping adjustments that were made post-data lockdown were 
absorbed in the transportation emissions calculation system. Historical outbound emissions increased <0.01% as a result.
Waste Target: 10% Waste 
Reduction per Unit in 
Manufacturing, DCs, and HQs
Waste Target: 100% Waste 
Diverted; 80% Recycled in 
Manufacturing, Packaging, DCs, 
and HQs
Data table: waste (Metric Tons)
14, 187 Various changes across NIKE’s waste footprint required revisions to historical waste data. These include:
1. Finished goods manufacturing footwear waste – Internal waste scrap material guide was updated to reflect evolution in waste tracking capabilities and materials used, establishing more granularity than 
was previously available. Material reused in the factory that isn’t considered waste was scoped out of historical waste values as a result. The difference in updated footwear finished goods manufacturing 
waste per unit compared to historically reported values of the same scope (FY20, 21) is -<0.5% per year. The revisions impact historically reported enterprise waste diversion by reducing diverted waste 
by <0.01%.
2. Finished goods manufacturing apparel waste – Fabric previously reported as downcycled/open loop is now reproduced for another brand in the same factory, enabling the shift to being classified as 
closed loop. Changes were made in tandem with the footwear revisions described above, deployed back to FY20 when the process shift initiated. These changes, together with those from the footwear 
scrap material guide updates described above, impacted FY20 and 21 enterprise waste recycling by lowering it <0.5%.
3. Packaging – Formulaic errors in baseline source data transformations were discovered and resolved across footwear, apparel, and accessories packaging, increasing overall FY20 packaging waste by 1% 
compared to historically reported values.
Appendix Notes
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
215 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
PwC Assurance 
Report
To the Board of Directors of NIKE, Inc. 
We have reviewed the accompanying 
NIKE, Inc. (NIKE) management assertion 
that the energy & emissions metrics for 
the year ended May 31, 2022 and the 
cumulative water restoration funding 
metric as of May 31, 2022 (collectively the 
“sustainability metrics”) in management’s 
assertion are presented in accordance 
with the assessment criteria set forth 
in management’s assertion. NIKE’s 
management is responsible for its assertion 
and for the selection of the criteria, which 
management believes provide an objective 
basis for measuring and reporting on the 
sustainability metrics. Our responsibility is 
to express a conclusion on management’s 
assertion based on our review.
Our review was conducted in accordance 
with attestation standards established by 
the American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA) in AT-C section 105, 
Concepts Common to All Attestation 
Engagements, and AT-C section 210, 
Review Engagements. Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the review 
to obtain limited assurance about whether 
any material modifications should be made 
to management’s assertion in order for it to 
be fairly stated. The procedures performed 
in a review vary in nature and timing from, 
and are substantially less in extent than, 
an examination, the objective of which 
is to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether management’s assertion is fairly 
stated, in all material respects, in order to 
express an opinion. Accordingly, we do 
not express such an opinion. Because of 
the limited nature of the engagement, the 
level of assurance obtained in a review 
is substantially lower than the assurance 
that would have been obtained had an 
examination been performed. We believe 
that the review evidence obtained is 
sufficient and appropriate to provide a 
reasonable basis for our conclusion.
We are required to be independent and 
to meet our other ethical responsibilities 
in accordance with relevant ethical 
requirements related to the engagement.
Our firm applies the Statements on Quality 
Control Standards established by the 
AICPA and, accordingly, maintains a 
comprehensive system of quality control.
The procedures we performed were 
based on our professional judgment. In 
performing our review, we performed 
inquiries, performed tests of mathematical 
accuracy of computations on a sample 
basis, read relevant policies to understand 
terms related to relevant information 
about the sustainability metrics, reviewed 
supporting documentation in regard to the 
completeness and accuracy of the data in 
the sustainability metrics, and performed 
analytical procedures.
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
quantification is subject to significant 
inherent measurement uncertainty because 
of such things as GHG emissions factors 
that are used in mathematical models to 
calculate GHG emissions, and the inability 
of these models, due to incomplete scientific 
knowledge and other factors, to accurately 
measure under all circumstances the 
relationship between various inputs and the 
resultant GHG emissions. Environmental 
and energy use data used in GHG emissions 
calculations are subject to inherent 
limitations, given the nature and the methods 
used for measuring such data. The selection 
by management of different but acceptable 
measurement techniques could have 
resulted in materially different amounts or 
metrics being reported.
The preparation of the energy consumption 
metrics require management to establish 
the criteria, make determinations as to the 
relevancy of information to be included, 
and make assumptions that affect reported 
information. The selection by management 
of different but acceptable measurement 
techniques could have resulted in materially 
different amounts or metrics being reported.
As discussed in management’s assertion, 
Report of 
Independent 
Accountants
NIKE has (i) estimated GHG emissions 
for certain sources and consumption for 
energy metrics for which no primary usage 
data is available and (ii) in fiscal year 2022, 
changed its reporting boundary to include 
fugitive emissions from refrigerant gas loss 
in reporting its Scope 1 emissions for certain 
facilities.
Based on our review, we are not aware of 
any material modifications that should be 
made to NIKE’s management assertion in 
order for it to be fairly stated.
Portland, Oregon
March 23, 2023
Appendix Assurance Report
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
216 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Fiscal Year ended or as of May 31, 2022 
Energy and Emissions
For the Fiscal Year ended 
May 31, 2022 (FY22)
Total Energy76 Consumption (MWh) 815,320
Renewable Electricity Consumption (MWh / %) 547,405 / 93%
Renewable Energy Consumption (MWh / %) 550,114 / 67%
Scope 1 (Direct) Emissions (Metric tons CO2e) 50,868
Scope 2 (Indirect) Location-Based Emissions (Metric tons CO2e) 224,035 
Scope 2 (Indirect) Market-Based Emissions (Metric tons CO2e) 24,900
Scope 3 (Category 6) Emissions from Commercial Air Travel (Metric tons CO2e) 13,297
Scope 3 (Category 4) Emissions from logistics (inbound) (Metric tons CO2e) 413,998
Scope 3 (Category 4) Emissions from logistics (outbound) (Metric tons CO2e) 152,869
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Water Restoration Funding
Cumulative since 2019 
program inception, as of 
May 31, 2022
Water Restoration project funding (Australia, India, and Pakistan) 
in NIKE’s Extended Cotton Supply Chain (USD)
$975,000
76 Includes direct fuel use and purchased or acquired electricity consumption.
Overview 
NIKE, Inc. (“NIKE”) management 
is responsible for the selection 
of the assessment criteria, which 
management believes provide an objective 
basis for measuring and reporting on the 
energy and emissions and the cumulative 
water restoration funding metrics 
(collectively the “sustainability metrics”) 
presented in the tables above. NIKE 
management is also responsible for the 
completeness, accuracy, and validity of 
the sustainability metrics.
NIKE, Inc.’s Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
217 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
ENERGY AND 
EMISSIONS
Standards
NIKE captures, calculates, and reports 
direct and indirect greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions data with consideration 
of the principles and guidance of the 
World Resources Institute (WRI) and the 
World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development’s (WBCSD) The Greenhouse 
Gas Protocol: A Corporate Accounting 
and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition)
(“GHG Protocol”) and the Corporate 
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and 
Reporting Standard: Supplement to the 
GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and 
Reporting Standard, which are recognized 
external standards.
Organizational Boundary
NIKE uses the operational control approach 
in conformance with the GHG Protocol 
to report its energy and emissions for 
100% of the facilities where NIKE has 
operational control. 
Scope
NIKE’s Scope 1, 2, a subset of Scope 
3 emissions (commercial air travel and 
outbound and inbound logistics), total 
energy consumption, renewable energy 
consumption and renewable electricity 
consumption reporting coverage is outlined 
in the chart on pages 218 and 219.
Emissions Source Scope Description
Renewable 
Electricity Consumption
− Percentage of global electricity sourced from renewable electricity is calculated as follows: (Renewable Electricity in MWh)/(Total 
Electricity Consumption in MWh) X 100. 
− Renewable electricity includes onsite solar and wind consumed, electricity purchased via Energy Attribute Certificates and 
Electricity Contracts as described in NIKE’s market-based emissions table below. 
− Total electricity consumption includes electricity, onsite solar and onsite wind consumption.
− Actual activity data is sourced from direct measurement or third-party invoices when possible. Where actual data is not 
available, consumption is estimated. Our estimation methodology for electricity is described below.
Renewable 
Energy Consumption 
− Percentage of global energy sourced from renewable energy is calculated as follows: (Renewable Direct Fuel Use in MWh + 
Renewable Electricity in MWh) / (Total Direct Fuel Use in MWh + Total Electricity Consumption in MWh) X 100. 
− Renewable direct fuel includes sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) and biogas.
− Total direct fuel use includes natural gas, hi-sene, diesel, propane, gasoline, jet fuel, sustainable aviation fuel and biogas. 
Refer above for total electricity consumption.
− Actual activity data is sourced from direct measurement or third-party invoices when possible. Where actual data is not 
available, consumption is estimated. Our estimation methodology for natural gas and electricity are described below.
Retail − Includes NIKE owned or operated NIKE Brand and Converse stores globally. 
− Energy consumption includes natural gas and electricity. Natural gas usage outside of the U.S. and Canada (and for landlordmanaged facilities in the U.S. and Canada), and electricity usage outside of the U.S., Canada, and EU (and for landlord-managed 
facilities in the U.S., Canada, and EU), is estimated. Our estimation methodology is described below.
− Refrigerant leakage from HVAC units are not included in reporting at this time.
Distribution 
Centers (DCs)
− Includes top 37 NIKE owned or operated DCs globally as of May 31, 2022, which represent approximately 87% of shipped units.
− Energy consumption includes natural gas, hi-sene, diesel, propane, electricity, onsite solar, and onsite wind. 
− Diesel is used in backup generators.
− Propane is used in at least two DCs for scrubbers/ floor sweepers. A portion of propane usage is estimated leveraging known 
propane usage. Our estimation methodology is described below.
− In addition, emissions include fugitive emissions from refrigerant gas loss. Our estimation methodology is described below.
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
218 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Source Scope Description
Offices − Includes emissions from building facilities at 4 Headquarter (“HQ”) locations: World Headquarters U.S. (“WHQ”), European HQ, 
Greater China HQ (“GCHQ”), and Converse HQ (together covering nearly 11 million ft2). Also includes emissions from non-HQ 
office facilities (such as regional sales offices). 
− Energy consumption within HQs includes natural gas, diesel, propane, electricity, and onsite solar; within non-HQ offices, 
energy consumption includes natural gas and electricity only. Natural gas usage within non-HQ offices outside of the U.S. and 
Canada (and for landlord-managed facilities in the U.S. and Canada), and electricity usage within non-HQ offices outside of 
the U.S., Canada, and EU (as well as for landlord-managed facilities in the U.S., Canada, and EU), is estimated. Our estimation 
methodology is described below.
− Diesel is used in backup generators.
− Propane is used in food services, vendor landscaping services, and some forklifts. 
− FY22 represents our first year including fugitive emissions from refrigerant gas loss for our HQ and non-HQ office facilities. Our 
estimation methodology is described below. In prior years, this source was reported as a known exclusion in NIKE’s office data.
Air Manufacturing Innovation (Air MI) − Includes NIKE-owned manufacturing facilities and related facilities that are the primary producers of NIKE air units. 
− Energy consumption includes natural gas, diesel, propane, and electricity.
− Diesel is used in backup generators.
− Propane is used in a single limited application in one Air MI facility.
− FY22 represents our first year including fugitive emissions from refrigerant gas loss. Our estimation methodology is described 
below. In prior years, this source was reported as a known exclusion in NIKE’s Air MI data.
Vehicles − Vehicles include service vehicles at WHQ and GCHQ. 
− Fuel consumption includes gasoline.
− Company-leased fleet vehicles for use by employees in other geographies are not included in reporting at this time. 
Jets − Includes jet and sustainable aviation fuel from our business travel using NIKE’s corporate jets, operated from the U.S., presented 
in Scope 1 emissions.
− FY22 represents our first year including sustainable aviation fuel. 
Commercial Travel − Data represents commercial business air travel for all employees across 40 countries.
− Commercial air travel emissions are estimated based on mileage calculated from number and route distance of trips, presented 
in Scope 3 emissions. 
Outbound Logistics − Data represents approximately 95% of global outbound transportation and distribution of products sold via the following modes 
of transportation: air, ocean, truck, and rail. Reported figures reflect well to wheel emissions.
− Emissions from transportation of Converse products outside of North America and transportation of NikeID products 
are excluded.
Inbound Logistics − Data represents approximately 95% of global inbound transportation and distribution of finished goods via the following modes 
of transportation: air, ocean, truck, and rail. Reported figures reflect well to wheel emissions.
− Emissions from transportation of Converse products outside of North America and transportation of NikeID products 
are excluded.
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
219 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
GHG Base Data
Activity data used to calculate Scope 1 
(direct) emissions is sourced from direct 
measurements or third-party invoices (e.g., 
hi-sene, diesel, propane, gasoline, jet fuel, 
sustainable aviation fuel, and natural gas). 
Activity data used to calculate Scope 2 
(indirect) emissions is sourced from thirdparty invoices (e.g., electricity) wherever 
possible and is collected across the 
business via a variety of internal processes 
and systems. Scope 3 (commercial air 
travel) data used to report GHG emissions 
from transporting our employees is 
obtained from reports provided by third 
parties which includes number of flights 
and distance data. Activity data used to 
calculate Scope 3 inbound and outbound 
emissions are sourced from third-party 
invoices (e.g., supplier expenditure including 
weight, transportation type, distance, and 
weight/volume) and is collected across the 
business via a variety of internal processes 
and systems. 
As described in this assertion, activity data 
for Scope 1 and Scope 2 is sourced from 
estimates where actual consumption data 
is not available. NIKE continues to work on 
obtaining systematic access to more actual 
consumption data. Estimates are described 
in more detail below. Reported data has 
been rounded to the nearest whole number.
Estimation Methodology
Estimation methodologies employ reasonable assumptions to avoid understating NIKE’s emissions footprint and are described below.
Emissions Source Scope Description
Natural Gas (retail and non-HQ offices outside 
of the U.S. and Canada, and landlord-managed 
facilities in the U.S. and Canada)
Where actual data is not available, natural gas usage is estimated for non-HQ offices outside of the U.S. and Canada, and for 
landlord-managed facilities in the U.S. and Canada. Square footage of retail and non-HQ offices per country is used, along with 
country-level climate assumptions and 2012 Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) energy use intensity 
(kWh per square foot) based on climate region. In the U.S. and Canada, where some facilities are landlord-managed and visibility 
related to energy consumption is low, our internal known average country-level energy use intensity is used instead of the 
external CBECS benchmark. In FY22, approximately 89% of retail natural gas consumption, and approximately 50% of office 
natural gas consumption, were estimated. Approximately 89% of reported retail Scope 1 emissions in FY22 were estimated, and 
approximately 37% of reported office Scope 1 emissions in FY22 were estimated.
Electricity (retail and non-HQ offices outside 
of the U.S., Canada, and EU, and landlordmanaged facilities in the U.S., Canada, and 
the EU)
Where actual data is not available, electricity usage is estimated for non-HQ offices outside of the U.S., Canada, and EU and 
for landlord-managed facilities in the U.S., Canada, and EU. Square footage of retail and non-HQ offices per country is used, 
leveraging actual FY22 square footage data, along with electricity intensity (kWh per square foot of known FY22 NIKE electricity 
usage in retail or non-HQ offices). In FY22, approximately 54% of retail electricity consumption, and approximately 24% of office 
electricity consumption, were estimated. Almost 100% of reported retail Scope 2 market-based emissions and approximately 68% 
of reported retail Scope 2 location-based emissions in FY22 were estimated. Almost 80% of reported office Scope 2 market-based 
emissions and approximately 36% of reported office Scope 2 location-based emissions in FY22 were estimated.
Propane (DC) Propane usage at two DCs is estimated leveraging propane consumption intensity at a comparable DC based on relative 
square footage.
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
220 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Source Scope Description
Fugitive emissions from refrigerant gas loss 
(DCs, HQ and non-HQ offices, Air MI)
DCs: Calculated by applying a default emissions leak rate of 10% (sourced from Table 3 of the U.S. EPA’s Direct Fugitive Emissions 
from Refrigeration, Air Conditioning, Fire Suppression, and Industrial Gases published in December 2020) to the total system 
capacity across all units. The assumed refrigerant is R-410A.
Air MI & World Headquarters (WHQ): Calculated using material balance77 where possible. When total recharge amount78 is not 
available to calculate emissions by material balance, equipment-specific charge capacities and default emissions leak rates from 
Table 3 of the U.S. EPA’s Direct Fugitive Emissions from Refrigeration, Air Conditioning, Fire Suppression, and Industrial Gases 
published in December 2020 are used. Default emissions leak rates range from 10% to 35% depending upon equipment type. 
Unless otherwise known, the assumed refrigerant is R-410A.
Non-WHQ Offices: Refrigerant use intensity (2.0 x 10-7 metric tons refrigerant lost per square foot per year) from The World Bank 
Group Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory Management Plan for Internal Business Operations, 2019, was applied to total office 
square footage to calculate total office refrigerant emissions. To calculate refrigerant use intensity, one ton of cooling per 500 ft2
is multiplied by a conversion factor of one ton of cooling per one kg of refrigerant charge and then by an assumed leakage rate of 
10%. The assumed refrigerant is R-410A.
Global warming potentials for all refrigerant gases come from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth 
Assessment Report (Assessment Report 5 - 100 year) published in 2014.
77 The Material Balance Method uses a mass balance analysis to calculate releases of refrigerants from equipment and associated emissions, based on: inventory (in storage, not in operating equipment), purchases and sales of refrigerants, and changes in total refrigerant 
capacity of equipment during the emissions reporting period. In NIKE’s case: refrigerant emissions from material balance method = (PN - CN) + PS + (CD - RD)
– PN = purchases of refrigerant used to charge new equipment (omitted if the equipment has been pre-charged by the manufacturer)
– CN = total refrigerant capacity of the new equipment (omitted if the equipment has been pre-charged by the manufacturer)
– PS = purchases of refrigerant used to service equipment
– CD = total refrigerant capacity of retiring equipment
– RD = refrigerant recovered from retiring equipment
78 Net sum of charge capacities across equipment types for NIKE operations, where charge capacity is the amount of refrigerant needed to run a refrigeration cycle.
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
221 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emission Factors
Emissions are reported in metric tons 
of carbon dioxide equivalent and include 
carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), 
nitrous oxide (N2O), and refrigerant R-410A. 
Exceptions to reporting CH4 and N2O 
are as follows: 
− Facilities’ emissions are reported in 
CO2e, however, within a limited subset 
of consumption data, emission factors 
for other gases (CH4, N2O) are not 
provided. These exceptions include AIB/
EU Residual Mix Emissions factors, and 
Green-e/US Residual Mix. In these cases, 
CH4 and N2O emissions are sourced from 
the next available source in the marketbased emission factors hierarchy.
− Commercial Travel emissions are in CO2
due to data availability. 
Carbon dioxide emissions and equivalents 
resulting from the activities and business 
units described above have been determined 
on the basis of measured or estimated 
fuel and electricity usage, multiplied by 
relevant, published carbon emission factors, 
which are updated annually according to 
an internal policy to use the most recent 
emission factors available before the annual 
internal cutoff date, which is 15 days after the 
fiscal year end. Carbon dioxide equivalent 
emissions utilize GWPs sourced from 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report
(Assessment Report 5–100 year). 
Prior to conversion to CO2e, metric tons of 
GHG emissions by gas are 79,962, 8, 0.62, 
and 2.29 of CO2, CH4, N2O, and R-410A, 
respectively. The other GHGs of sulfur 
hexafluoride (SF6), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) are not emitted 
by NIKE facilities. 
In quantifying market-based electricity 
GHG emissions, GHG Protocol Scope 2 
Guidance: An amendment to the GHG 
Protocol Corporate Standard defines a 
hierarchy of factors for quantifying marketbased emissions, in order from highest 
to lowest precision. The table to the right 
describes the hierarchy and the relevance 
to NIKE for the current year reporting79.
Emission Source Type Emission Factor Employed
Direct Line Connection Not applicable
Energy Attribute Certificates Where NIKE purchases Renewable Energy Credits (RECs) and retains environmental 
attributes, NIKE applies these RECs to electricity consumption across owned or 
operated facilities, reflecting market boundary considerations. Remaining consumption 
is converted to CO2e using the respective emission factors. 
Emissions from biofuel renewable energy credits are calculated using biofuel sourcespecific emission factors applied to CO2 and to fugitive emissions for CH4 and N2O. 
Electricity Contracts Where Renewable Energy Credits (RECs, or Guarantees of Origin (GOs)) generated via 
(virtual) power purchase agreements are retained by NIKE, NIKE applies these RECs to 
electricity consumption across owned or operated facilities, reflecting market boundary 
considerations. Remaining consumption is converted to CO2e using the respective 
emission factors. 
Residual Mix U.S. & Canada: NIKE applies residual mix emission factors from Green-e Energy U.S. 
Residual Mix Emissions Rates.
EU: NIKE applies country emission factors from Association of Issuing Bodies (AIB). 
Location-Based Factors If none of the above options are available, NIKE uses location-based factors as 
described in the table on the following page.
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
79 In the absence of a contractual instrument (or electricity consumption that exceeds onsite renewables and contractual instruments), NIKE historically applied energy supplier-specific 
emission factors when available and met a third-party quality criteria review. Supplier-specific emission factors are not used in FY22 reported data as Power Purchase Agreements 
initiated in FY20 and FY21 are used instead.
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
222 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
This table outlines the emission factor 
sources used in FY22 emissions 
calculations.
Emissions Source Emission Source Type Emission Factor Employed
Scope 1 Natural Gas GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Hi-sene GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Diesel GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Propane GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Gasoline GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Jet Fuel GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 1 Sustainable Aviation Fuel GHG Protocol Emissions Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 2 Electricity Contractual instruments: (Virtual) Power Purchase Agreements (vPPA); energy attribute certificates (EAC). In FY22, 
NIKE applied PPAs/vPPAs and EACs for:
− Facilities in Oregon, U.S. that are in scope of NIKE’s PPA with Avangrid
− Facilities in the U.S. and Canada that are in scope of NIKE’s U.S. vPPA
− Facilities in the European Economic Area that are in scope of NIKE’s EU vPPA
− Facilities in the EU, Greater China (GC), and Asia, Pacific and Latin America (APLA) that purchase solar and/or wind, 
biomass, or smallscale hydro unbundled Guarantees of Origin (GOs)/Energy Attribute Certificates (EACs)
Scope 2 Electricity (U.S. and Canada) Green-e Energy US Residual Mix Emissions Rates
For facilities in the U.S. and Canada that do not have contractual instruments, NIKE uses residual mix factors.
Scope 2 Electricity (U.S.) eGRID (location-based)
In the absence of contractual instruments and residual mix factors, NIKE applies a regional/national grid mix factor. This only 
applies to landlord-managed facilities in the U.S.
Scope 2 Electricity (EU) AIB European Residual Mixes
For facilities in the EU that do not have contractual instruments available, NIKE uses residual mix factors.
Scope 2 Electricity (Global, 
excluding U.S.)
IEA World Electricity CO2 Emissions Factors (location-based)
In the absence of contractual instruments, residual mix factors, and a regional/national grid mix factor, NIKE applies a protocol 
that covers all countries globally. This global protocol serves as a catch-all for any facilities that haven’t obtained an emission 
factor from a more granular source in the market-based hierarchy. 
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
223 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
Emissions Source Emission Source Type Emission Factor Employed
Scope 3 
(Commercial 
Travel only)
Air travel GHG Protocol Emission Factors from Cross-Sector Tools March 2017
Scope 3 
(Outbound 
Logistics)
Air, Ocean, Truck and 
Rail Shipping
Outbound logistics emission factors are sourced in compliance with the European Standards Methodology for calculations 
and declaration of energy consumption and GHG emissions of transport services (freight and passengers) DIN EN 16258 
standard (March 2013). 
Scope 3 
(Inbound 
Logistics)
Air, Ocean, Truck and 
Rail Shipping
Inbound logistics emission factors are sourced in compliance with the European Standards Methodology for calculations and 
declaration of energy consumption and GHG emissions of transport services (freight and passengers) DIN EN 16258 standard 
(March 2013).
Uncertainty
GHG emissions quantification is subject 
to significant inherent measurement 
uncertainty because of such things as 
GHG emissions factors that are used in 
mathematical models to calculate GHG 
emissions, and the inability of these models, 
due to incomplete scientific knowledge and 
other factors, to accurately measure under 
all circumstances the relationship between 
various inputs and the resultant GHG 
emissions. Environmental and energy use 
data used in GHG emissions calculations 
are subject to inherent limitations, given the 
nature and the methods used for measuring 
such data. The selection by management 
of different but acceptable measurement 
techniques could have resulted in materially 
different amounts or metrics being reported. 
The preparation of the energy consumption 
metrics requires management to establish 
the criteria, make determinations as to the 
relevancy of information to be included, 
and make assumptions that affect reported 
information. The selection by management 
of different but acceptable measurement 
techniques could have resulted in materially 
different amounts or metrics being reported.
NIKE recognizes that commercial air travel 
and logistics remain an estimate since 
unforeseen circumstances can occur (e.g., 
different routes due to adverse weather or 
unforeseen aircraft fleet changes), however 
the figures presented are considered to be 
a reasonable estimate of NIKE’s commercial 
air travel and logistics emissions. 
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
Play
Our Reporting Approach
Introduction
Target Progression
People
Planet
224 FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
Appendix
WATER
Background
In support of its Water Restoration 
target, NIKE funds project work aimed 
at supporting the long-term resilience 
of the water basins within its extended 
cotton supply chain. Thus far, NIKE has 
not implemented water restoration project 
activities itself, but instead supports project 
activities and implementation conducted 
by third-party NGOs. Additionally, NIKE 
partners with third-party engineering firms to 
calculate approximate restoration volumes 
and tracks the volume of water restored 
through these projects. Since the inception 
of NIKE’s Water Restoration projects in India, 
Australia, and Pakistan (new in FY22), NIKE 
has funded $975,000 for the three projects. 
Scope
NIKE’s water restoration efforts focus on 
regions in Tier 4 of its extended cotton 
supply chain. NIKE only considers water 
restored through this portfolio of projects 
when calculating progress towards the 
water restoration target. Additional water 
restoration that occurs incidentally in 
or through unrelated NIKE activities is 
not included. 
Estimation Methodology
NIKE works with project implementation 
partners and third-party engineering firms to 
quantify volumetric benefits from the water 
restoration projects. This quantification 
approach aligns with the World Resources 
Institute’s Volumetric Water Benefit 
Accounting Methodology and uses 
version 8.0 of the United Nations Food and 
Agricultural Organization (FAO) CROPWAT 
program and version 1.2.1 (QSWAT+) of the 
Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) 
model. Data inputs for quantification are 
provided by the project implementation 
partners and estimated volumetric benefits 
are discussed and confirmed with project 
partners and third-party engineering firms. 
The project types included in this volume of 
water restored include:
1 Agricultural water demand reduction 
measures (Beed District, Maharashtra 
State, India)
a. VWB (Volumetric Water Benefit) 
Indicator: Reduced consumption
b. Calculation Method: Consumption 
method 
2. Land conservation (Nimmie-Caira 
Wetlands, New South Wales (NSW), 
Australia)
a. VWB Indicator: Avoided runoff 
b. Calculation Method: Curve Number 
method
3. Wetland restoration and creation 
(Nimmie-Caira Wetlands, NSW, Australia)
a. VWB Indicator: Increased recharge
b. Calculation Method: Recharge method
4. Forest rehabilitation (Ayubia National 
Park, Pakistan)
a. VWB Indicator: Avoided runoff
b. Calculation Method: Curve Number 
method
5. Rainwater harvesting (Ayubia National 
Park and Uchhali Complex, Pakistan)
a. VWB Indicator: Increased recharge, 
volume captured, and available supply
b. Calculation Method: Volume Provided 
and Capture and Infiltration Method
6. Drinking water storage and ablution water 
system creation (Ayubia National Park 
and Uchhali Complex, Pakistan)
a. VWB Indicator: Annual average 
volume of water provided
b. Calculation Method: Volume Provided 
method
7. Wetland treatment system construction 
(Uchhali Complex and South Punjab, 
Pakistan)
a. VWB Indicator: Treatment efficiency
b. Calculation Method: Volume Treated 
method
8. Agricultural and irrigation efficiency 
improvements (South Punjab, Pakistan)
a. VWB Indicator: Agricultural water 
demand reduction 
b. Calculation Method: Withdrawal and 
Consumption method
Appendix NIKE, Inc. Management Assertion
FY22 NIKE, Inc. Impact Report
purpose.nike.com
www.nike.com