APRIL 2024
Skills for a Sustainable Future:
How Green and Digital Skills Intersect 
and Will Change the Future of Work
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 2
Table of Contents
Foreword 3
The Green-Digital Revolution 5
Measuring the Intersection of Green 
and Digital Skills 7
Field Workers Adopting AI 12
Enhancing Water System Operations Resiliency 13
Upskilling to Reduce Waste 14
Early Career Opportunities for Workers by Global Region 16
Conclusion: Building Skills in a Digital and Green Future 17
Appendix 1: Skills Analysis 19
Appendix 2: Global Skills 21
References 22
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 3
Foreword
By Matt Sigelman, President of the Burning Glass Institute, and Justina Nixon-Saintil, VP and Chief 
Impact Officer of IBM
WHY DIGITAL SKILLING IS A CRITICAL IMPERATIVE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT, 
THE ECONOMY, AND LEARNERS
At the most recent Conference of the Parties 
meeting (COP28), participants reaffirmed their 
commitment to hold global temperature change 
to 1.5 degrees Celsius. They also acknowledged 
that current emissions would have to be reduced 
by 43% from 2019 levels, and that current 
progress was off target. 
Why is this critical? In the last year, we witnessed 
the damage from increased natural disasters. 
During the summer of 2023, many people 
experienced the existential challenge of climate 
change. In June, New York City turned into an 
orange haze from the wildfires hundreds of 
miles north in Canada. In August, the once-lush 
paradise of Maui turned into a deadly tinderbox 
as fires spread unchecked, exacerbated by hot 
temperatures and dry conditions. In the fall, Libya 
experienced devastating floods. More areas of the 
world are feeling the effects of climate change, 
from parts of coastal Florida where homes are 
increasingly difficult to insure due to hurricane 
flood risk to India, where temperatures more than 
43 degrees Celsius have become all too common. 
Without greater action, the consequences will only 
get worse as heat waves, storms, and dust bowls 
intensify, causing billions in economic damage to 
urban centers and agricultural lands alike.
Fortunately, the world is starting to take action to 
mitigate and slow the impact of climate change. 
Many countries around the world have signed 
international agreements which aim to limit 
global warming and reduce carbon emissions. 
Trillions of public and private capital, fueled 
by landmark legislations are supporting the 
deployment of proven renewable technologies 
and the development of promising interventions 
such as carbon capture and storage, nuclear 
fusion, and electric vehicles.
However, new power generation, transmission, 
and automotive investments alone will not be 
sufficient. To reach the goals outlined in many of 
the international agreements, the world will also 
need to decarbonize the entire economy, from 
consumer manufacturing to office buildings to 
transportation of finished goods. In addition to 
new physical investments, technology will play 
a major role in making existing industries more 
energy efficient and less carbon intensive. Labor 
skills at the intersection of green and digital will 
also play a major role in ensuring the full and 
rapid deployment of technologies, integrating 
them into existing ways of working and ensuring 
that they are properly deployed in the context 
of their existing physical environment.
So, what does that mean as the world adapts to a 
changing climate and new sustainable inventions, 
interventions, and strategies are adopted to 
achieve global emissions targets while maintaining 
economic growth and standards of living?
The Burning Glass Institute and IBM believe 
that it means new economic opportunities 
for workers. In 2023, Burning Glass Institute 
partnered with IBM to study and identify new 
jobs that have emerged and explore what our 
data says about in-demand knowledge and skills.
Demand for cutting-edge green and digital skills 
is creating those new job opportunities. There 
are expanding interactions and new intersections 
between the skills that drive a sustainable global 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 4
environment. These blend digital skills with many 
that previously had been core to jobs that were 
squarely in the green economy. Green and digital 
jobs increasingly overlap, creating demand for 
workers who can work with digital skills in the 
green economy and for workers who deploy 
core green skills across the economy.
What do we mean when we say that digital skills 
are intersecting with green skills and creating new 
economic opportunities? It means that workers 
who have worked in digital roles are increasingly 
adopting skills like energy conservation and 
management. It means that workers in natural 
resource management and solar installation 
increasingly need to understand artificial 
intelligence (AI), technical coding languages, and 
other digital skills as their fields adopt technology 
that makes them less carbon-intensive. There 
are also new and exciting roles that sit at the 
intersection of these fields. Green-digital roles 
like environmental data analyst and cybersecurity 
roles that focus on maintaining grid resilience and 
sustainability.
While these new opportunities are exciting, there 
are important steps that learners, workers, and 
employers must all take to develop the skills 
that will drive the full actualization of a greening 
economy and labor market. Society at large – 
businesses, educators, policymakers, and workers 
– must all find ways to invest in building new skills 
that will enable the green transition.
In addition to partnering with the Burning Glass 
Institute to develop a better understanding of 
these intersections, IBM supports green and 
digital skill building. Through IBM SkillsBuild, IBM 
has launched new courses to support learners 
and workers in building skills that will allow them 
to be competitive at this intersection of green 
and digital skills, and to make the world more 
sustainable.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 5
The Green-Digital Revolution
Global adoption of new and innovative 
technologies to drive a more sustainable and less 
carbon-intensive economy is surging. Businesses 
and governments are investing in new infrastructure 
and systems that help reduce environmental impact 
and extend the useful lifetimes of existing assets 
and strategies. Similarly, innovative solutions are 
rapidly coming to market that make the world more 
sustainable and resilient.
What is driving these trends? A changing climate 
means less predictable weather and more 
severe weather events. These extreme events 
threaten broad community and human health, 
and business operations. The most recent UN 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Report identified that 3.3 billion people across 
the globe live in areas vulnerable to significant 
impacts from climate change. In many cases, 
it is an economic concern that also drives 
sustainability imperatives as communities explore 
strategies to ensure they remain resilient to a 
changing climate. 
With nearly half of the global population 
vulnerable to significant environmental impact, 
new strategies to create a sustainable future 
are essential. Sustainability matters across 
corporations, organizations, governments, 
and communities. It also means that there are 
significant new economic opportunities and skill 
demands for workers. IBM and the Burning Glass 
Institute have partnered to examine trends in the 
labor market and demand for skills that will drive a 
sustainable future and chart a pathway for workers.
Our analysis identified an important confluence 
of change – the digitization and technology 
enablement of the future of work directly 
intersects with the greening of work that is driven 
by investments and strategies to build a more 
sustainable future. 
Green skill growth is significant among highly 
digital roles. Burning Glass observed a 93.1% 
growth in demand for green skills from 2018–
2023 as measured by the number of green skills 
requested per job posting. Looking across a set 
of jobs that are highly digitally-focused, both 
in office and industrial settings, we observed 
significant growth in green skill demand in job 
postings. 
Digital skills have become essential skills in 
green roles. As the green sector has become 
more pervasive and in-demand across the 
economy, it has adopted digital strategies to 
remain productive. Workers must now interface 
with digital solutions as part of their core 
responsibilities. 
While these two trends are deeply intertwined, 
they have different impacts on workers. As 
roles evolve to meet the needs of the green 
economy, new skills that enable more sustainable 
production and consumption are increasingly at 
the forefront of the labor market.
We see these changes happening broadly. This 
growth in demand for sustainability solutions 
has created new opportunities for workers and 
driven new forms of green-focused work and 
created new blends of skills. For example, some 
roles are specializing in new technologies, such 
as applying AI to complex green infrastructure. 
Other roles, like electricians, are seeing broad 
growth in green skill demand, such as solar 
installation. Smart energy technology and energy 
load management, which are often controlled 
by computer and microchip mean that many 
skilled trades need to learn basic interfacing with 
computers and coding. Both the deep and broad 
forms of emerging and changing roles have 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 6
significant opportunity to create a sustainable 
future. The rising green economy goes beyond 
the development and deployment of new climate 
technologies. Rather, the green revolution is 
transforming a much wider array of occupations 
across existing industries and functions, enabling 
them to become more energy and cost efficient. 
Major changes are happening for workers in 
jobs that are often identified as “green jobs.” 
Think of environmental consultants or installers 
of solar panels: these workers are essential to the 
decarbonization of the economy. Government 
investment and consumer preferences are 
driving this decarbonization, spurring investment 
in productivity-enhancing technologies. 
Unsurprisingly, workers in these industries have 
begun to adopt new tools such as AI, to predict 
electrical line failures or drones to monitor solar 
farm efficiency, to become more effective. 
Integrating green skills drives a sustainable 
future. These are especially evident among 
digital roles. Many roles that were typically not 
seen as “green jobs” are now experiencing a 
change in the skills that are demanded to be 
effective, specifically significant growth in the 
overall green content. While often only a small 
portion of skill-demands in a role are green, these 
components can have a profound overall impact 
on an employee’s day-to-day tasks. For example, 
a software engineer might be expected to know 
more about energy efficiency as part of their 
job developing large language models. These 
emerging skill requirements will touch many 
markets and sectors, from energy production and 
manufacturing to transportation to construction 
and infrastructure development.
A sustainable future is a digital future. We have 
seen similar transformations play out before. 
Over the last 40 years, the digital revolution 
rewrote the labor market, with most well-paying 
jobs now demanding digital skills, including jobs 
far outside the tech sector such as healthcare, 
energy production, and hospitality. Thus far, the 
sustainability revolution is following a similar 
pattern. But the comparison is apt for another 
reason: what we are experiencing today isn’t 
just a new wave of transformation, paralleling a 
prior generation of change. Rather, these two 
revolutions intersect in many places. The emerging 
green economy is increasingly an extension of 
the digital economy while the digital world itself 
recognizes the imperative to become greener.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 7
Measuring the Intersection of Green 
and Digital Skills
The confluence of the digital and green 
revolutions bears out in the underlying skills 
of work. While it may be enticing to imagine 
that new job categories will drive a sustainable 
future, our analysis of labor market trends and 
the changing content of work suggests that 
traditionally digital roles, such as computer 
programming, will evolve to support less carbonintensive ways of working. Our analysis of the 
confluence between digital and green skills 
provides a first-of-its-kind view into how the 
skills-content of jobs in these fields are changing.
To identify trends across these different roles, 
we performed an analysis of the skills-content 
of millions of job ads across the globe and their 
overall skill content. We focused on roles that 
were in the traditionally green sectors, roles that 
are deeply associated with the tech industry, 
and roles that were highly focused in technology 
and digital. We identified skills that sat at the 
intersection of these fields and then used those 
highly important intersectional skills to identify 
jobs and roles that sat at the middle. Intersections 
between these roles can be seen through three 
job clusters: deep green roles, deep digital roles, 
and balanced roles.
Deep green roles are roles identified in our 
analysis that have high shares of overall skills that 
are associated with green skills and tend to be 
technically skilled roles, in non-software-focused 
positions, often in field-based work. Green skills 
include energy efficiency, energy management, 
and environmental regulations. These are roles 
and occupations that are often reflected in the 
US Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor 
Statistics’ or the United Nations Environmental 
Programme’s definitions of the green sector.
Deep digital roles are ones identified in our 
analysis that have high concentrations of 
digital skills. They have high technical software 
requirements (often requiring several softwarespecific coding or technical skills), are seen 
across multiple industrial sectors, and on average 
have a higher propensity for remote work. While 
generally lower in total content of green skill 
demand, there is fast growth in demand for green 
skills among these roles.
Balanced roles are many that have a blend 
of digital and green skills. These roles show 
balanced but relatively low levels of specialized 
requirements across both digital and green 
skills. Sitting at the intersection of the green and 
digital sectors are skills in data visualization, 
automation, and data analytics. These three skills 
are not only being deployed in the green sector 
to meet new ways of working but they are also 
critical skills for a growing spate of tech workers 
– especially those specializing in green roles or
working in the green sector. We also see crosscutting demand for professional skills such as
communication and collaboration.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 8
Prevalence of Green Skills versus Digital Skills in Job Postings
Source: Burning Glass Institute Analysis of Lightcast Job Postings Data
4
2
2 4 6
0
Green skills per post
Digital skills per post
Deep Green
• Technical, non-software
• Quickly digitizing
• Core to the green sector
• Field-based
Balanced
• Blended roles, some
green and digital 
requirements
Deep Digital
• Highly technical
software requirements
• Many sectors
• Remotable
Category: Balanced Deep Digital Deep Green
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 9
Critical Digital Skills Intersecting with Green Skills
Data Analysis Automation Data Visualization Professional Skills
ComputerScience Artificial Intelligence Data Management Collaboration
Data Management C++ Excel Customer Service
Data Science Calibration Python Innovation
Excel Code Review R Leadership
Python IBM Maximo SQL Motivational Skills
R Java Strategic Planning
SQL SQL Team Building
Statistical Analysis Problem Solving
Source: Burning Glass Institute Analysis of Lightcast Job Postings Data
Data visualization, automation and data analytics 
are broad bundles of skills that capture many 
individual and specific skill sets that roll up into 
broader skill sets. The following table shows 
many of the individual skills that make up the 
broader skill categories previously described.
Green jobs now demand digital skills. Digital 
skill demand in traditionally-defined green roles 
– such as roles for those involved in installing
renewable energy, cleaning, and restoring natural
resources, or building energy efficient new
products – has been on the rise. Deep green
roles, typified by skilled technical work, now
require digital skills.
Often bespoke sets of digital skills are driving 
the digital revolution in deeply green work. For 
example, forestry and environmental science 
technician roles increasingly require skills in 
coding and interfacing with machinery using 
software to automate machinery, replacing 
significant amounts of potentially dangerous 
and physically demanding manual tasks. Such 
skills are making these technicians safer and 
more productive while making natural resources 
management more cost-effective. The Great Belt 
Fixed Link and Melbourne Water case studies 
highlighted in this report are good examples of 
how communities, governments, and companies 
are adopting digital skills strategies to enhance 
the productivity of deeply green roles by digitally 
equipping the functions and workers that serve in 
deeply green roles.
Digital roles are contributing to the green 
sector. At the same time that deeply green roles 
are digitizing; many deeply digital roles are 
greening. Digital roles increasingly require some 
green skill development. These growth trends 
seem likely to continue. In our analysis of the 
greening of deeply digital roles, we observed a 
93.1% growth in the frequency of green skills 
in job postings among deeply digital roles 
from 2018–2023. In some deep digital roles, the 
growth of green skill demand is over 200% for 
roles in industrial settings and IT. These skills 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 10
Data Analyst to Environmental Data Analyst
Data Analyst
Environmental 
Data Analyst
Environmental science
and chemistry
SQL server management/
relational database
Spatial analysis
and GIS
Planning and workflow
management
IT and technical
support Biology
Dashboard development
and business intelligence Data mining and science
Data modeling Mathematics
Economics Finance
Data analytics
Data management
Statistics
SQL programming
Excel
Communications
Python / R / Research
Tableau / Power BI
Data visualization
PowerPoint
Verbal 
communications Writing
MS Oce
Source: Burning Glass Institute Analysis of Lightcast Job Postings Data
often ranged across many areas including deep 
knowledge of a subject matter field such as 
physical sciences, forestry, or green building 
codes, and often included enhanced workplace 
safety and sustainability management skills. 
Many digital roles now require awareness of 
specific green skills. Green roles such as energy 
conservation and management, visualizing 
of geospatial information, and greening and 
automation of processes are evident across 
deeply digital roles. While these workers are 
rarely classified as green through traditional 
measures, the green functions they play are 
incredibly important to making the economy 
more sustainable.
Consider a network and computer systems 
administrator, a role that manages and maintains 
computer networks. They build network systems, 
ensure that the systems are running and reliable, 
and monitor usage and access of computer 
networks and systems. Network and computer 
systems administrators are increasingly employed 
to set up and monitor smart infrastructure 
that improves energy efficiency for buildings. 
According to Lightcast data, demand for skills 
related to energy management and conservation 
grew by 139% from 2018–2023 among network 
and computer systems administrators. At the 
same time, core green sector capabilities like 
impact analysis, product cycle management, and 
environmental process improvement and safety 
are increasingly important foundational skills 
across deeply digital, deeply green, and balanced 
roles. Many workers are learning these skills on 
the job, but there is a need for more focused 
training and education. 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 11
Some roles, especially digital roles, are 
becoming more specialized. Deeply digital 
roles, including those that focus on analytics and 
operations, sales, or design and development, 
are emerging as specialized green digital jobs. 
For example, environmental data analysts, 
which represent a specialization of the broader 
data analyst role, are now widely prevalent. 
To complement the foundational analytical 
capabilities of a data analyst, environmental 
data analysts need to build skills in Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) and spatial analysis, 
process management, and automation. Critically, 
they must also build a strong knowledge base 
in their specific application, such as energy 
production, environmental science, or chemistry. 
We have observed similar specializations in 
fields like sustainable transportation managers 
– specialists in developing sustainable solutions
to transportation; and environmental systems
managers – workers who automate buildings
and production facilities to be more efficient
and sustainable. Other digital roles are also
incorporating green skills into their work. For
example, roles in cloud computing, cybersecurity,
AI and machine learning (ML), and automation
engineering increasingly utilize green skills.
Energy efficiency is the most critical and soughtafter green skill in the job descriptions that Burning 
Glass Institute examined.1
 An understanding and 
awareness of environmental regulations is critical 
for success in many of these digital green roles. A 
cybersecurity analyst for a watershed management 
firm may be more effective in their role when they 
understand overall water quality standards and 
processes required by law.
1 See Appendix 1 for skills analysis details
Finally, emergent technologies will also have 
huge implications on economic activity and 
energy demand, which will flow through skills 
required in the labor force. AI, powered by 
the cloud and enormous advances in large 
language models (LLMs) and other algorithms, 
has the potential to be a major boon for the 
global economy. According to consulting firm 
McKinsey & Company, generative AI is poised 
to add $4.4 trillion of economic activity while 
automating or improving the productivity 
of key functions such as sales & marketing, 
customer relations, and R&D and engineering. 
In the coming decades, new AI applications 
will redefine the tech, healthcare, finance, and 
education industries, among others, allowing 
skilled practitioners and professionals to do 
more in less time and at a lower cost. However, 
advances in AI will also mean that we need to 
ensure energy efficiency and overall energy 
management – this could be an emerging 
green-digital role.
As a result, future technology employees 
need to be cognizant of the importance of 
embedding sustainability across their work 
activities. Model design can play a huge role: 
redesigning GPT-3 can reduce emissions by as 
much as 75%. However, efficient model design 
and optimization of hardware architecture are 
needs that permeate all of technology. As the 
green imperative grows, so does the need to 
ensure that the tech workforce has the skills 
required to perform their jobs in the greenest 
way possible.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 12
CASE STUDY
Field Workers Adopting AI
The Great Belt Fixed Link is an 11-mile network 
of bridges and tunnels connecting islands in 
Denmark, creating a direct link between the 
islands of Zealand and Funen. The Link enabled 
road and rail access between the mainland of 
Denmark and its capital, Copenhagen. It is a 
critical piece of infrastructure for the country, 
reducing travel times and ferry traffic to the 
cities across the country. It has facilitated the 
use of public transportation and reduced carbon 
emissions. With the development of the Link, 
intercity train travel across Denmark now has 
the largest share of travel. Many intercity flights 
no longer operate because of the efficiency and 
predictability of the service.
Building the Great Belt Fixed Link remains the 
largest construction project in the history of the 
country, and maintenance of a critical piece of 
infrastructure is a massive undertaking with high 
stakes. Maintaining bridge safety is complex and 
ever changing. The owner and operator of the 
bridge, Sund and Baelt Holding A/S, previously 
hired mountain climbers to scale the bridge and 
traverse spans, taking pictures of the structure 
to identify areas in need of maintenance and 
service. This was labor intensive and time 
consuming – the bridge has over 300,000 
square meters of concrete that has to be visually 
inspected every six years – a very difficult and 
intensive, manual task.
Routine and preventative maintenance can 
significantly expand the life of the bridge, 
decrease closure time, and improve safety. 
Several years ago, the company determined that 
it needed to improve its predictive maintenance 
capabilities and explored new technologies to 
increase the productivity and timeliness of their 
maintenance assessments.
Sund and Baelt adopted a strategy that used 
a combination of AI and Internet of Things 
technologies that make maintenance of the 
Great Belt Fixed Link significantly safer and 
more efficient. The firm partnered with IBM to 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 13
develop a solution that is now the IBM Maximo 
for Civil Infrastructure Suite, an infrastructure 
asset management platform. It uses AI to deploy 
drones, read photography from the drones, and 
compare it to both observed data and models 
of the bridge and tunnel network. When paired 
with historical models of traffic loads on the 
Link, Sund and Baelt is better able to predict its 
maintenance needs, improving longevity and 
reducing bridge downtime.
These changes also have a profound impact on 
many of the field-based workers like the machinery 
and industrial maintenance technicians that manage 
the Great Link Fixed Link, who now manage drones 
and models from asset management software rather 
than manually taking pictures. These changes are 
projected to increase the life of the Fixed Link 
by 100 years, doubling its estimated lifetime, 
allowing it to reduce over 750,000 tons of carbon 
emissions through greater longevity.
CASE STUDY
Enhancing Water System Operations Resiliency
The state of Victoria, Australia is known as the 
Garden State because of its rainfall and its capital, 
Melbourne, is known for its extensive greenspace. 
Greenspace, parks and natural areas, cover 
19% of the land area in the city. While the city’s 
greenspace is a significant asset, its management 
is a challenge – especially as the city is 
increasingly exposed to extreme weather events 
from a changing climate. This is especially true 
for the water and sewer system in Melbourne. 
For example, in 2018, the city experienced a 
once-in-a-thousand-year rainfall event – over 
50 centimeters of rain fell in just 15 minutes – 
causing flash flooding and power outages. Similar 
challenges are expected to increase in frequency 
over time because of expected sea level rise and 
resultant storm surges.
Melbourne Water, the city’s water utility, manages 
the network of infrastructure for stormwater 
management and its maintenance is central 
to the city’s ability to manage the increasing 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 14
intensity and frequency of storms. Keeping the 
network of storm grates clear of debris and open 
is important to drain water to avoid flooding 
and damage from storms. The utility adopted an 
automated monitoring system, based in the cloud 
and using automated and AI software developed 
by IBM, to aid in the dispatching of field staff to 
clear and clean storm grates. 
Roles at Melbourne Water doing stormwater 
management are still deeply focused on fieldbased work helping to clean, clear, and maintain 
infrastructure – this remains the core of their 
job, but the way workers perform this work has 
changed. New digital skills have enabled workers 
and the company to be more targeted and 
focused on directing field workers and resources 
to the greatest areas of need – meaning that they 
keep the system up and running more effectively.
In the past, maintenance was performed on a 
rolling basis and if a blockage happened right 
after an inspection, there could be significant 
delays in clearing it. Digital monitoring and 
service dispatch has helped the city and 
Melbourne Water adapt to increasingly frequent 
and intense weather events and mitigate the 
disruptions that those events will cause to 
city services – an important step in building a 
sustainable city.
CASE STUDY
Upskilling to Reduce Waste
Manufacturing waste is a significant and 
prominent contributor to waste production. If 
input materials enter a manufacturing facility in 
poor condition or if there are issues with tooling 
and production processes, the materials or the 
output may become waste. Similarly, an input 
material may arrive in a condition that makes 
it unfit for use, such as a component that was 
damaged in shipping. Identifying these defects 
is often difficult and typically driven by human 
inspection. New digital strategies are helping 
to drive better identification of component and 
© nordroden - stock.adobe.com
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 15
output defects, leading not only to significant 
waste reduction, but also to better quality 
outputs.
Ford Motor Company found themselves in this 
very situation. In 2020, Ford produced over 1.7 
million vehicles with dozens of different trims and 
feature packages. This results in a highly complex 
set of intermediate parts and final goods, 
sometimes causing defects that were not visible 
or noticed by the human eye.
Ford explored digital manufacturing strategies 
that would help advance quality control and 
augment human inspection strategies. Because 
of its longstanding excellence in automobile 
manufacturing, Ford already had a large frontline 
workforce that was ready to adopt new digital 
technologies to improve quality and remove 
waste. However, the company needed to identify 
strategies that would be implementable without 
significant downtime for their workforce.
Ford partnered with IBM to develop a mobilebased AI and ML visual inspection software 
that is used in assembly plants. The software 
interfaces with a cloud-based centralized data 
system that trains the algorithm to identify 
manufacturing defects and imperfections. Over 
time, the software improves as humans provide 
more feedback. In addition, Ford ensured that its 
workforce was upskilled so that it was ready to 
use the new software on Day 1, enabling workers 
to better integrate it into existing workflows. 
While built as a sophisticated AI software 
application, frontline workers integrated it into 
the quality assurance and overall assembly 
process quickly and efficiently. As a result, Ford’s 
production quality, speed, and waste have all 
been greatly improved. Production quality sped 
the inspection process and reduced overall waste 
out of the facility.
The strategy has been successful in identifying 
defects and reducing potential industrial waste. In 
addition to reducing waste in combustion engine 
vehicle manufacturing, in 2022, the IBM mobile 
visual inspection strategy has expanded its use 
cases to more complex and innovative use cases 
including electric vehicle assembly.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 16
US/Canada
• Environmental science tech
• Environmental compliance analyst
• Sustainability analyst
• Environmental health and safety
• Infrastructure operator
Latin America
• Infrastructure operator
• Operations analyst
• Cybersecurity analyst
• Green sales representative
• Environmental project manager
Middle East/Africa
• Environmental project analyst
• Environmental health and safety
specialist
• Facilities managers
• Engineering technicians
Europe
• Cybersecurity analyst
• Infrastructure field service tech
• Environmental health and safety
specialist
• Infrastructure operator
Asia and Pacific
• Sustainability analyst
• Environmental project manager
• Climate/carbon analyst
• Facilities manager
• Cybersecurity analyst
Source: Burning Glass Analysis of Lightcast Job Postings Data
Early Career Opportunities for Workers by 
Global Region
Green and digital roles exist today worldwide. 
Some roles are broadly available and accessible 
no matter where a worker is in the world, while 
others vary by region. Certain skills are critical for 
competitiveness in the green economy and are 
often driven by broader skill sets and the global 
economy in general. BGI analysis identified many 
roles across the globe that are particularly strong 
opportunities for early career workers to take an 
on ramp into green and digital roles. 
Refer to Appendix 2 for details. 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 17
Conclusion: Building Skills in a Digital and 
Green Future
While digital expertise and green expertise are 
not one and the same, they are intersectional and 
at that intersection lies a set of opportunities. 
These are opportunities for workers, for 
employers and firms, and for civil society.
Workers can build green digital skills to advance 
their careers. Workers in the green sector are 
increasingly adopting digital skills to enhance 
productivity and efficiency. Workers in the digital 
realm are seeing a growing demand for green 
skills to harmonize their work with environmental 
concerns, align with growing demand for 
environmentally friendly practices, and help 
manage finite resources. But these are not the 
only trends. Sitting at the specialization of digitalgreen intersections are specialized roles that 
focus heavily on sustainability concerns from a 
digital perspective. These emerging roles create 
new and exciting opportunities and complexity.
Employers and firms are demanding green and 
digital skills. Our analysis shows that firms are 
looking for green skills among digital workers and 
digital skills for green workers. Well-refined digital 
skills can help firms be good stewards of resources 
– from energy to natural resources and help them
be more effective in their businesses that produce
goods that impact the environment. These
growing demands are evident across many sectors
– they are seen in forestry with the adoption of
AI just as they are seen in the technology and
finance sector with the adoption of conservation
and energy efficiency strategies. These improve
sustainability, but also affect the bottom line.
Digital-green workers will drive a sustainable, 
opportunity rich future. Skilling programs at the 
intersection of digital and green skills will help 
drive sustainable and climate resilient outcomes 
for society. Additionally, by equipping workers 
in traditionally green roles with advanced digital 
skills, they will become more productive and 
effective in their roles. In addition to blended 
digital and green roles, we continue to see 
growth in demand for digital skills in green roles. 
How can this emerging opportunity be more 
fully realized? First is building skills that sit 
at the intersection of digital and green skill 
demands. Digital strategies and technologies 
will greatly expand the efficacy of deeply fieldbased work – as is supported throughout the 
case studies in this report – from maintaining 
and extending the life of physical assets to 
deploying new crop management strategies, 
digital skills help make those efforts more 
efficient and help scale the intervention 
strategies significantly. In many cases they also 
help lower barriers to entry and make smaller 
scale enterprises more competitive.
Our analysis identifies gaps in the skills that 
workers have and the skills that the market is 
demanding for digital and green work. While 
there is a current gap, it is surmountable with 
skill building at scale – often the necessary skills 
can be learned or taught through flexible and 
digital venues. Deploying upskilling for in demand 
digital and green skills can happen through online 
learning platforms like IBM’s SkillsBuild. We 
encourage workers, educators, and employers to 
think about the changes in their companies at the 
intersection of digital and green skills and identify 
a plan or partner to help advance upskilling. 
These steps can help to meet the digital and 
green skills demand we observe. 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 18
Finally, while blending digital and green skills 
will drive innovation in work, there will also be 
transformation as complex and emergent new 
combinations of skills drive greener and more 
sustainable work. These deeply intertwined 
trends are more than the sum of their parts: new 
specializations are beginning to emerge between 
these roles that we previously have not observed. 
Going forward, we expect they will continue to 
emerge more significantly and create a digitallyenabled, sustainable future.
Learn More 
Do you want to help make a more sustainable world? 
Join the Green and Digital Revolution!
Learn skills like artificial intelligence and machine learning, data analysis, data visualization, 
and automation and learn about how they can drive green jobs and a sustainable future. 
IBM SkillsBuild offers courses at the intersection of green and digital skills.
https://skillsbuild.org/ 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 19
Demand for key skills in crucial roles
Application Avg. % of JDs Requiring Skill
Energy Efficiency - % of Skill Demanded Across All Roles
Cloud Computing 30.8%
Al /ML 29.3%
Cyber 30.0%
Automation Engineering 86.9%
Environmental Regulations - % of Skill Demanded Across All Roles
Cloud Computing 21.9%
Al /ML 13.0%
Cyber 23.2%
Automation Engineering 10.3%
Environmental and Resource Management - % of Skill Demanded Across All Roles
Cloud Computing 13.4%
Al /ML 16.3%
Cyber 19.6%
Automation Engineering 2.0%
Water Management - % of Skill Demanded Across All Roles
Cloud Computing 6.3%
Al /ML 13.3%
Cyber 9.1%
Automation Engineering 15.8%
APPENDIX 1:
Skills Analysis
To assess the demand for green skills, Burning 
Glass Institute collected data on millions of 
current and past jobholders, and on more than 
100,000 job descriptions, across roles in four key 
areas: AI and ML, cloud computing, cybersecurity, 
and automation engineering. Within each of 
these areas, BGI collected information on specific 
jobs, such as software developers, computer 
systems engineers, and line managers. In the next 
decade, these roles will create millions of new 
jobs, account for trillions of economic activities, 
and determine the direction of tech hiring.
Although the demand for green skills has been 
growing overall, a few skills were in higher 
demand, as the following table shows:
Source: Burning Glass Institute Analysis of Lightcast Job Postings Data
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 20
Unsurprisingly, energy efficiency is a key skill for 
all four subsectors given the energy demands 
of the tech sector. The need is especially acute 
for automation engineers, but roughly 30% 
of cloud, AI, and cyber roles also emphasize 
energy efficiency. Short-form training programs 
are especially well-suited to energy efficiency. 
In the tech sector, data center engineers can 
be trained in energy-efficient ways to cool 
data centers and minimize water use. Video 
instruction can outline best practices about the 
cost and the environmental implications of better 
heat dissipation. This aligns private incentives 
(reducing electricity bills and overheating) 
with public environmental incentives (reducing 
emissions related to overuse of electricity).
Environmental regulations, and resource and 
water management, are emerging skill areas for 
tech, with 15–20% of job descriptions requiring 
the skill in some areas. While not as ubiquitous 
as energy efficiency, these skills will continue 
to grow in demand over time as additional 
reporting requirements are put in place (for 
example, forthcoming SEC regulations on 
Scope 1–3 emissions). Conversely, skills such as 
conservation and clean energy are not frequently 
listed in job descriptions (usually low single-digit 
percentages). This suggests that background 
knowledge, while useful for understanding the 
rationale behind decarbonizing the tech industry, 
is not as valued by employers, who are much 
more focused on bottom-line cost and energy 
issues. To be more relevant and effective, green 
training should focus on areas that have direct 
implications on company performance such as 
energy efficiency and water management. 
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 21
APPENDIX 2:
Global Skills
The confluence of green and digital skills is 
a global phenomenon. Yet the trends show 
the unique contours of different parts of the 
globe. Exploring these trends regionally helps 
identify the economic opportunities for workers 
and learners and prioritize where countries, 
educational institutions, and employers can make 
investments in skill building.
 To localize the global analysis, we investigated 
trends in several global markets, with a focus 
on early career opportunities at the intersection 
of green and digital skills. We examined the 
following regions:
• US and Canada
• Europe
• Asia and the Pacific
• Mexico and Latin America
• Africa and the Middle East
There were several important trends that were 
clear and evident across these global regions. 
In the US, Canada, Europe, Asia, and the 
Pacific, many of the greatest opportunities at 
the confluence of green and digital roles are 
in the fields of analytics and green business 
management – deeply digital, green-specialized 
roles. This concentration of roles suggests that 
these markets have significant demand for skill 
development in analytics and visualization. 
Focusing on early career development in these 
markets often implies that workers will need to 
build skills through educational experiences. 
Some learners may attend college to build the 
skills necessary to serve in these roles, others 
may build them through work experience and 
innovative new learning experiences – but 
strong foundations in core digital skills like 
analytics are key.
Other markets like Mexico, Latin America, 
Africa, and the Middle East see significant 
opportunities in digitizing skilled technical 
work in major energy production and major 
manufacturing plant operations. Developing new 
skills and competencies across the workforces 
in these regions should include building skills 
in automation, particularly to make processes 
greener and more sustainable at major 
production facilities and in major infrastructure 
operations. Automation skills include training and 
developing AI and machine learning processes to 
support industrial production, manufacturing, and 
management of infrastructure.
Skills for a Sustainable Future April 2024 22
References
“Building Bridges to Better Insight” IBM. 2021 https://www.ibm.com/case-studies/sund-and-baelt
“Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,” Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. United Nations, 2022. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
“Explaining Extreme Events from a Climate Perspective,” American Meteorological Society, accessed 
June 6, 2023, https://www.ametsoc.org/index.cfm/ams/publications/bulletin-of-the-americanmeteorological-society-bams/explaining-extreme-events-from-a-climate-perspective/
“Efforts to Link Climate Change to Severe Weather Gain Ground,” American Association 
for the Advancement of Science, 2016. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
science.351.6279.1249#:~:text=To%20make%20the%20link%2C%20researchers,the%20risk%20of%20
heat%20waves
“Ford Presents Its Prestigious Innovation Award to IBM” IBM. 2021. 
https://www.ibm.com/blog/ford-it-innovation-award-ibm/
“Green Jobs: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,” accessed June 7, 2023, https://www.bls.gov/green/home.htm 
“Green economy,” UNEP - UN Environment Programme, October 23, 2018, 
http://www.unep.org/pt-br/node/23750
“Optimization could cut the carbon footprint of AI training by up to 75%” University of Michigan School 
of Engineering. 2023. 
https://news.engin.umich.edu/2023/04/optimization-could-cut-the-carbon-footprint-of-ai-training-by-up-to-75/
“The economic potential of generative AI: The next productivity frontier” McKinsey & Company. 2023. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-ofgenerative-ai-the-next-productivity-frontier#introduction
“This Is How Climate Change Could Impact the Global Economy,” World Economic Forum, June 28, 
2021, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/06/impact-climate-change-global-gdp/
“Towards Zero Waste Manufacturing: A Multidisciplinary Review,” Journal of Cleaner Production 168 
(December 1, 2017): 1230–43, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.09.108
“Uncovering opportunities to reduce energy consumption and emissions with the IBM Envizi ESG 
Suite,” IBM. 2023 https://www.ibm.com/case-studies/melbourne-water-envizi
“Waste Elimination for Manufacturing Sustainability,” Procedia Manufacturing, 2nd International 
Materials, Industrial, and Manufacturing Engineering Conference. February 2015, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.003
APRIL 2024
Skills for a Sustainable Future:
How Green and Digital Skills Intersect 
and Will Change the Future of Work